Delhi (Hindi: दिल्ली Dillī, Urdu: دہلی Dihlī, Punjabi: ਦਿੱਲੀ Dilī), India's largest city, is the country's thriving melting pot. Home to New Delhi, the country's capital, Delhi is at the centre of India's arts, commerce, education, tourism and transit. As the capital of several empires over the last 2000 years, the city contains a striking array of well-preserved historic sites for tourists to visit.
Delhi is the core of the National Capital Region (NCR), one of the world's largest metropolitan areas, with nearly 30 million inhabitants in 2025.


== Districts ==

 

For travel purposes, this article divides Delhi into seven districts. Much of Delhi's pre-colonial wonders is spread across South Delhi, South East Delhi and Old Delhi. The British first settled at North Delhi before moving to the new capital New Delhi in 1911.


== Understand ==
Travellers with little experience of visiting developing megacities may find Delhi to be chaotic at its worst, crowded and for much of the year, polluted. Air pollution has been a major problem in Delhi since the 1980s, with much of the day dominated with a very unhealthy amount of particles. During the late spring and early summer months, the city is scorchingly hot. Dig a little deeper, however,  and you will get a glimpse of order beneath the chaos, as well as India's traditional and modern cultural richness flourishing side by side. First-time visitors experiencing culture shock are advised not to compound it by visiting during adverse weather conditions, and get a decent hotel room so you can stay in comfort between your sightseeing trips. In addition, read up on the various scams and other uncomfortable situations travellers to India often encounter. Prepaid SIM cards for tourists are readily available at the airport arrivals hall and convenience stores. They offer generous data packages at low rates.


=== Name ===

The name "Delhi" (Hindi: दिल्ली Dillī, Urdu: دهلی Dihlī, both roughly DIHL-lee) refers to the National Capital Territory (NCT) in Northern India, whereas New Delhi is the capital city within the NCT. The NCT is also considered a city of its own, governed by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD).
The modern English, Hindi and Urdu names are derived from the archaic Hindi-Urdu name Dehlī (देहली / دهلی). There has been much debate regarding the origin of that name, as well as various myths and legends. One of the most popular theories is that the name Dehlī is a corruption of the Persian word dahlīz (دهلیز), meaning "threshold" or "gateway", which is considered symbolic of the city as a gateway to the Indian Plains.


=== History ===

With evidence of continuous settlement dating back to the 6th century BCE, Delhi is one of the oldest inhabited cities in the world. Thought to have been built and destroyed eleven times, evidence of at least eight distinct settlements can still be seen in Delhi. The most well-preserved historic sites are from the periods of Muslim and British rule, between 1193 and 1947.
The legendary city of Indraprastha from the epic Mahabharata is said to have been situated where Delhi now lies, but no remains of it have been found.

From the 10th to 14th century, the city was centred in what is now South Delhi:

1 Anangpur (Surajkund) — Built in the 9th-10th century on what is now the far southern outskirts of Delhi, in Faridabad. A large water reservoir can be seen, well preserved.
2 Qila Rai Pithora — Founded in perhaps the 11th century as a city named "Lalkot" under Hindu rule, in the current Mehrauli area. In around 1180, Hindu ruler Prithviraj Chauhan expanded this city and renamed it Qila Rai Pithora. Some of the ruins of the fort ramparts from this period are still visible around Qutb Minar and Mehrauli.
3 Mehrauli — Shortly afterwards, in 1192, Muslim leader Muhammad Ghori defeated Prithviraj Chauhan in battle. Ghori left his slave Qutb-ud-din Aibak as his viceroy, who in turn captured Delhi the subsequent year. After Ghori's death in 1206, Qutb-ud-din proclaimed himself the ruler of Delhi and founded what is known as the Slave Dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. Qutb-ud-din contributed significantly in terms of architecture by building Mehrauli. His most prominent contribution is the starting of Qutb Minar (which was finally completed in 1220). The tombs and other buildings near the Qutb Minar also date to this period.
4 Siri —  The Slave Dynasty was followed by the Khalji dynasty. In 1303 they established Siri, first as a military camp to protect against possible Mongol invasion, and later as a fortified city. Nowadays Hauz Khas complex (north of Mehrauli) contains ruins of Siri Fort, a madrasa, and other buildings from the period.
5 Tughlakabad — After the Khaljis there was chaos until Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq (a Turk governor) invaded Delhi in the 1320s, started the Tughlaq dynasty, and founded a new capital Tughlakabad, in South East Delhi. His son Muhammad Bin Tughlaq created another city called Jahapanah in the area between Siri and Qila Rai Pithora, uniting them into one city. Tughlakabad continued, however, to be the main capital city.

Starting in the 14th century, new areas were built further north, near the current city centre:

6 Ferozabad (Feroz Shah Kotla) — built by Muhammad bin Tughlaq's son, Feroz, in 1354. There still are some ruins which are visible around the Arun Jaitley Stadium in Central Delhi, near the river. The city was an enclosed large area and contained many palaces, mosques, pillared halls, and a multi-floored water reservoir. Feroz also erected a 1500-year-old Ashokan Pillar (previously erected in Meerut by Maurya emperor Ashoka) on top of the palace. Feroz was buried inside a lofty tomb in Hauz Khas. After his death, the sultanate became unstable and weak, and Delhi was conquered and sacked by Tamerlane. The Sayyid and Lodi dynasties who ruled Delhi after the Tughlaqs did less building, and the only relevant architecture visible from this period are the tombs at Lodi Gardens. The last of the Lodis was defeated by Babur, who then proceeded to establish the Mughal Empire in 1526.
7 Shergarh (Purana Qila) — In 1533, Babur's son Humayun built the new city of Dinpanah, near the river south of Firozabad. In 1540 Humayun was defeated by Sher Shah Suri and forced to withdraw from Delhi. Sher Shah Suri established the new city Shergarh on the ruins of Dinpanah. Shergarh is near the Delhi Zoo. Humayun later reconquered Delhi and returned to power. He then completed the construction and proceeded to rule from Shergarh.
8 Shahjahanabad (Old Delhi) — the following emperors moved away from Delhi and made Agra their capital. Shahjahan (Humayun's great-grandson) returned to Delhi and established Shahjahanabad, including the Jama Masjid and the Red Fort. Much of the city wall, and three of its six gates, still exist today.
9 New Delhi (Lutyens' Delhi) — New Delhi was established in 1911 after the British decided to move India's capital from Calcutta (present-day Kolkata). It is a planned city, designed by architect Sir Edwin Lutyens.


=== People ===
Fondly called "Delhiites" (DEHL-ee-IGHTS), the city's population is a heterogeneous mix of people originally belonging to different parts of the Indian plains and beyond. The original natives used to live on the banks of the Yamuna River, the only major river flowing through the city. However, not all descendants of the builders of Delhi's many Muslim monuments live here. Many of them migrated to Pakistan during the Partition of India in 1947, with the community in Old Delhi that is keeping old courtly traditions alive smaller than it once was.
On the other hand, the same Partition brought around five hundred thousand refugees from Punjab to Delhi. This led to a strong Punjabi influence in the city's language, dress and cuisine. Delhi also has South Indian communities in neighbourhoods like Karol Bagh, RK Puram, Mayur Vihar and Munirka. Other than that, there are prominent ethnic enclaves like Chittaranjan Park (Bengali), Majnu ka Tilla (Tibetan) and Punjabi Bagh (Punjabi).
The capital city status of New Delhi has later attracted people from other parts of India, making it a thriving melting pot. You can find at least one Delhiite whose ancestors migrated from at least one of the country's 28 states and 8 union territories. Quality education also draws students from different states, making up one of the most diverse student populations in the country.


=== Orientation ===
Like the rest of the Gangetic Plains, Delhi is relatively flat. The only geographical features of any significance are the river Yamuna, which flows down the eastern side of the city, and the Delhi Ridge which form a wide but low arc across the west. On the west bank is the crowded and congested Old Delhi and, to the southwest, the broad, tree-lined avenues of New Delhi, built by the British to rule their Raj. The rest is an endless low-rise sprawl of suburbia and slums, with South Delhi generally wealthier.


=== Climate ===

The climate in Delhi goes through five distinct seasons. Winter, from December to January, is cold (the temperature drops to near freezing at night though the days are warm) and is notorious for the thick layer of smog that hangs over the city, resulting not only in cancelled flights and delayed trains, but also warnings to stay indoors and wear high-quality masks if you need to venture out. Spring, in the months of February and March, is pleasant with warm days and cool evenings. Summer, in April and May, is uncomfortably hot with temperatures soaring as high as 45 °C. Temperatures moderate during the monsoon season (June to September), but it is humid. Autumn, from October to November, brings warm days with relatively cool nights.


=== Read ===
Delhi – India Charming Chaos by Johnny Fincioen. This book concentrates on today's power centre of New Delhi and its historical context. The text and the 117 original pictures offer the reader a holistic view of the way of life in the capital of India.
Kultar's mime : stories of Sikh children who survived the 1984 Delhi massacre, Sarbpreet Singh's book on the 1984 genocide against Sikhs by anti-Sikh mobs. (ISBN 9781523834136)
When a tree shook Delhi : the 1984 carnage and its aftermath, Manoj Mitta; a book on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. (ISBN 9788174366191)
Tibetans in Delhi, by S. Khurana, about refugees from Tibet living in Delhi. (ISBN 9781542954198)
Delirious Delhi, Dave Prager; a portrait of Delhi by an expat resident. (ISBN 1611458323)


=== Visitor information ===

1 The Government of India Tourist Office, 88 Janpath, Connaught Place, ☏ +91 11 2332 0005, +91 11 2332 0008, +91 11 2332 0109, +91 11 2332 0266. The Government of India Tourist Office offers daily tours, coverings all of the major Delhi sites. If you should choose to go with the government-sanctioned day tour, be aware that due to the heavy agenda, you will need to have a quick foot, only 20-40 min are given for each sight, which is next to no time. Consider this day tour as a sampler. If there is a sight of particular interest, bookmark it and return at a later date. The staff at the tourist office is very helpful and the office has a lot of free information. 
Official websites:

Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi
Delhi Tourism
Municipal Corporation of Delhi


== Talk ==
Like the rest of the Hindi belt, the native language of the Delhi area is Hindi. It is spoken by almost all locals, quite often with Bihari and Punjabi accents. Most educated people are also fluent in English, and many shopkeepers and taxi drivers have a functional command of English. Punjabi and Urdu are also the official languages of Delhi, both of which are widely spoken/understood by the locals.
The Hindi spoken in Delhi is quite Persianised, similar to the one spoken in western Uttar Pradesh, and much less Sanskritised than the one spoken in Varanasi or Madhya Pradesh. Signage is usually bilingual in Hindi and English. However, the road signs in New Delhi (as well as in South and Central Delhi) are in Hindi, English, Punjabi and Urdu. Announcements on the metro are in Hindi (male voice) and English (female voice). Unlike other major cities, locals are not multilingual, and local tour guides do not speak other Indian languages. Though people from all over India live in Delhi, finding a person who can speak other Indian languages is not so easy.


== Get in ==


=== By plane ===

1 Indira Gandhi International Airport (DEL IATA, sometimes abbreviated as IGI). The arrival point for many visitors into Delhi. There are several security checkpoints in the airport and you may have to show your boarding pass and passport a dozen times before boarding the plane. When leaving Delhi from the international terminal, arrive three hours before the time of departure. For domestic flights, two hours should suffice, depending on whether or not you must wait in the queues to check luggage. While sometimes time-consuming, the process is smooth, and the new terminal's shops and restaurants are sensibly located at the gate area, not before security. However, if you wish to change Indian rupees back into foreign currency, you must do this before clearing security. There is a complimentary inter-terminal bus that can take you between terminals, but it requires that you present your boarding pass within the terminal and get a coupon that entitles you to travel for free on the bus. Note that unlike western airports, these buses can go into city traffic and be subject to rush hour or other reasons why you can get delayed. (updated Sep 2022)
2 Noida International Airport (DXN  IATA), Jewar, Uttar Pradesh (70 km (43 mi) SE central Delhi). Due to massive growth in air travel, a new airport has been built at the southeastern outskirts of the Delhi metro area. It only serves domestic destinations as of June 2026. Sadly, the faraway airport lacks public transport, so buses and taxis are your best bet to get into the city centre. (updated Aug 2026)
3 Hindon Airport (HDO IATA), Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh. Serves some regional flights as a civil enclave inside an air base. (updated Oct 2025)


=== By bus ===
Buses arrive from Kathmandu and Chitwan in Nepal (36 hr+) and virtually every city in India. Although not as comfortable as the trains, buses are the only choice for some destinations, mainly those in the mountains.
Delhi has three major Inter-State Bus Terminals (ISBTs): Kashmere Gate, Sarai Kale Khan and Anand Vihar. The Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) is the major operator, but every state also runs its own buses and there are some private operators too.

4 Kashmere Gate ISBT (Maharana Pratap) (Metro Kashmere Gate, Line 1/2), ☏ +91 11 43090100, info@dimts.in. This is "the" ISBT and the largest of the lot. Buses to points north: Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh, Garwhal, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Nepal 
5 Sarai Kale Khan ISBT (Vir Hakikat Rai) (next to Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station). Buses to points south, (Agra, Madhya Pradesh) 
6 Anand Vihar ISBT (Swami Vivekanand) (On the east bank of Yamuna, M: Anand Vihar). Buses to points east (Lucknow, Kumaon) 
7 Bikaner House, Pandara Rd, New Delhi (metro: Central Secretariat  2  6 ). Buses, including air-conditioned Volvo buses from Jaipur arrive at this place. For travel between Jaipur and Delhi, this bus stop is very clean, less crowded than ISBT, and easy to reach. 
8 Majnu ka Tilla, New Aruna Nagar, (Tibetan colony, a short rickshaw ride from Metro Vidhan Sabha). Buses to Dharamsala 


=== By train ===

Once you have purchased a ticket either at the ticket office or on-line prior to the trip, all you need to do is go to the rail car labelled with your class of service purchased. You can either get on and sit in the first available seat or, for higher classes of service, they will often post a passenger list on the car when it stops. Look for your name and go to the assigned car, cabin and seat. There is never a need to get a boarding pass so if anyone comes out of the crowd to tell you that, don't listen to them; it is a scam. If you're brave, you can simply purchase a general 2nd class ticket and then get on any car where there is availability. The conductor will come by and check your tickets after the train starts moving. If you are in a higher fare class than you are ticketed for, all you have to do is simply pay the difference in fare to the conductor. The only risk here is that the train could be full and you could be stuck in the lowest fare class which can be very crowded with little room to sit.
Ticket buying: The easiest way is to book online through the IRCTC booking website. Registration requires verification of an email address and a mobile phone number.
Do not trust strangers who appear out of the crowd to help you; ignore them. Always ask for assistance at the enquiry counter or policemen (in khaki uniform). Anyone who approaches you spontaneously should be completely ignored. Use one of the porters (in orange uniforms with metallic arms badges) to find your train and carry your luggage, in exchange for a tip.

 Ticket office (on the road to Connaught Place with longer hours). It often has waiting times not much longer than at the tourist booking office. You will need to know the number or name of the train you want to take. 


==== Stations ====
9 New Delhi  NR  (code: NDLS). 6AM–11PM. The main station of Delhi, and the terminal of most Rajdhani Express trains. See New Delhi for details. (updated Feb 2026)
10 Delhi Junction  NR  (code: DLI) (metro: Chandni Chowk  2 . There is an entrance just outside at the east end of the station and also just over the main road outside (last metro at about 11:30AM). If taking an auto rickshaw from here, the prepaid desk will often try to charge you as much as three times the actual price quoted on the official price guide displayed clearly in their window - bargaining is sadly often cheaper.). The secondary station of Delhi. (updated May 2023)
11 Hazrat Nizamuddin  NR  (code: NZM), Harsha Rd, Nizamuddin East, (A few kilometres to the south. Bus 261, 306 to the Sarai Kale Khan Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT) on the ring road and then walk over to the station (400 m).). Many trains heading south. It's the least chaotic of the Big Three, but still pretty big and poorly signposted; listen to the announcements to figure out your train. The station has a pretty good food court that sells inexpensive, hygienic takeaway snacks including sandwiches and samosas. (updated May 2023)
12 Anand Vihar Terminal  NR  (code: ANVT) (metro: Anand Vihar  3/4  7 , RRTS: Anand Vihar  DM , just opposite to Anand Vihar Interstate Bus Terminal (ISBT)). Terminal of most east-bound services. (updated Oct 2025)
13 Delhi Sarai Rohilla  NR , Railway Officers Colony, (metro: Shastri Nagar  1 ; bus 71, 89).  (updated May 2023)
14 Delhi Cantonment  NR  (bus 518, 545, 588 to  Delhi Cantt). Luxury trains like the Royal Orient depart from this station. Besides, a Vande Bharat Express from Ajmer terminates at Delhi Cantonment. 


=== By rapid rail ===
Namo Bharat, colloquially rapid rail, is an RRTS network operating between Delhi and other satellite towns of the National Capital Region (NCR). It is faster than the existing local trains serving the area. As of 2025, only the Delhi–Meerut  DM  stretch of the network is operational.


=== By car ===
Delhi is connected to other parts of India by national highways, including expressways. The expressways serving Delhi include:

Delhi–Mumbai Expressway (NE 4) — one of the longest expressways in India, connecting Delhi to Mumbai.
Delhi–Dehradun Expressway — connects Delhi to Dehradun.
Delhi–Gurgaon Expressway (NH 48) — provides direct connectivity to New Delhi from Gurugram.
Delhi–Meerut Expressway (NE 3) — provides direct connectivity to New Delhi from Meerut.
Delhi–Noida Direct Flyway (DND Flyway) — provides direct connectivity to New Delhi from Noida.
DND–KMP Expressway (NH 148NA) — connects New Delhi and Noida to Faridabad.
Delhi–Amritsar–Katra Expressway — an under-construction expressway, intended to connect Delhi to Amritsar and Katra.


== Get around ==
Getting around Delhi is always an adventure.  Traffic is, by and large, horribly congested and many drivers will think nothing of quoting ten times the going price to a tourist.  Use the prices below as broad guidelines and agree on prices before setting off.  The best way to travel is via metro, where there are separate cabins for women (which prove to be very useful during rush hour).  Metro is clean, efficient, and typically ridden by relatively affluent middle-class students or commuters en route to/from work; there is almost nowhere in the city that you cannot get to by metro.


=== By metro ===

The fast-growing Delhi Metro network provides a cheap, quick, mostly hassle-free and air-conditioned way of zipping around the city, although its increasing popularity means that rush hour crowds at key interchanges are starting to resemble Mumbai. As of 2026, there are 9 lines operational with 12 branches spanning over 370km and 271 stations:

Red Line  1 : Dilshad Garden–Rithala
Yellow Line  2 : Samaypur Badli–HUDA City Centre
Blue Line  3/4 : Dwarka Sector 21–Noida Electronic City
Blue Line branch: Yamuna Bank–Vaishali
Green Line  5 : Mundka–Inderlok
Green Line branch: Ashok Park Main–Kirti Nagar
Violet Line  6 : Kashmere Gate–Ballabhgarh
Orange Line  Airport Express : New Delhi–IGI Airport–Dwarka Sector 21
Pink Line  7 : Majilis Park–Shiv Vihar
Magenta Line  8 : Krishna Park Extension –Botanical Garden
Grey Line  9 : Dwarka–Dhansa
Fares range from ₹10-60, just buy a token, change lines as necessary, and deposit the token in the slot as you exit. Tokens can be used only from the station they are bought, so you can't buy two and use the second to return home. If you're planning on sticking around for a while, you can buy a "Smart Card" for ₹200, which is worth ₹150 and includes a ₹50 deposit; using this saves 10% and, more importantly, lets you avoid the queues.  There is also a "Tourist Card" allowing unlimited use for ₹150 (1 day) or ₹300 (3 days), but it's highly unlikely that you'll travel enough to make this pay off.  Special fares apply for travel on the Airport Express. During rush hour, you might have to queue up for more than 20 minutes due to security checks, especially in the central stations.
The Yellow Line, in particular, is useful for getting to the Delhi Junction (Chandni Chowk, Jama Masjid) and New Delhi railway stations, the ISBT bus terminal, the backpacker ghetto of Paharganj, Hauz Khas and Qutub Minar. The Blue Line is also handy for visiting Akshardham, Botanical Garden and accessing the western parts of Paharganj through RK Ashram Marg station. The Magenta Line is also useful for getting to the Terminal 1 of Delhi Airport and visiting Hauz Khas, Lotus Temple, Okhla Bird Sanctuary and Botanical Garden.
The first coach in every train is reserved for women only; violations incur a penalty. Male passengers accompanying women or girls are forbidden, too.
Be aware that if you wish to exit at a main station during rush hour, you will have to tackle your way through in order to get out before the opposite flow of passengers push you back inside. Don't be afraid of using your strength to push yourself out.


=== By bus ===

All parts of Delhi are well connected by buses and with tickets ranging from ₹5-25 they are very cheap, but they are also quite crowded most of the time. The red and blue buses are air-conditioned and the green and orange ones are not. As bus stops do not have bus routes written properly, it can be difficult to find your way. Asking other people at the bus stop is often the best way to find out about bus routes to your destination. However, the buses are pretty frequent, running every 15-20 min or so on most routes.
There are two kinds of buses in Delhi:

Government run DTC (Delhi Transport Corporation) buses (red and green with big windows)
Privately run Blue-Line buses (orange)
If you have a choice, opt for a DTC bus. They will stop less frequently and will generally be less crowded too. Note that many buses, DTC ones too, will stop pretty much anywhere if there are enough people getting on or off.
DTC also runs special feeder buses from metro stations called DEVI(Delhi Electric Vehicle Interconnector) for last mile connectivity. Smaller electric bus fleet which run on shorter and narrower routes on which large DTC buses do not travel.
Board buses at the back and pay the ticket seller sitting right next to the door. Be sure to hang onto your tickets, as ticket checks are fairly frequent. Some seats on the left side of the bus may be reserved for women and the handicapped. When it's time to disembark, move to the front of the bus. As you might expect, all these guidelines are regularly ignored when buses are very crowded.


==== Hop on Hop off ====

 HOHO, ☏ +91 11 4094 0000 (Helpline). Delhi Tourism operates a Hop On Hop Off bus service. A fleet of air conditioned low floored buses follow a pre-defined set of stops around the city and passengers can hop off the bus, see the place at one's own convenience and hop on the next bus. The service runs on a 45 minute interval and covers important monuments, memorials, museums and shopping places in the city. Each bus is staffed with a knowledgeable English speaking guide. The ticket costs ₹ 600 and is valid for 2 consecutive days. The service does not operate on Mondays. (updated Jan 2026)


=== By taxi ===

A taxi or hired car (usually with driver) is required to see many of the far-flung sites within and around Delhi. However, the metro is a far cheaper and equally comfortable option.
Most Delhi taxis are old but reliable CNG-run Ambassadors or Omnis in distinctive black-and-yellow livery and a green stripe. The hired family car of choice is usually a Toyota Innova or Chevrolet Tavera. While all are equipped with meters and should cost ₹15 for the first km ₹8.5 per km, the meters are often rigged and it's better to agree on the price in advance. Most trips around the city should be ₹200-500, while a trip to the airport would be higher, depending on starting location. An eight-hour charter should cost around ₹1,500, and a tip is expected if the driver is helpful. The prices would also depend upon the vehicle size too. Black and yellow taxis are not air-conditioned. Even if they do have air conditioning, you will be charged extra (and the rates are up to the driver, so bargain hard).
Modern radio taxi services: at ₹20/km, they're more the list price of the competition, but they use modern vehicles with air-conditioning and GPS and can be dialled 24 hr/day. The flag fare is ₹20, and the fare increases by ₹5 for every 250 m after the first km. If you need an SUV, you need to inform the company in advance, but the fare remains the same. Night charges (25% extra) apply between 11PM to 5AM. Book up to a few hours in advance. Many corporate people rely on these cabs for their daily commute and they may be booked during office hours. Tipping is not expected. After booking, you will receive an SMS with the car plate number, and the driver's name and mobile number. Usually the driver will call you and inform you that they have arrived. Many drivers speak English at a very basic level, so use short phrases.
You can use TaxiPixi services and avoid all the hassle, available on both Android and iOS.
As of 2024, taxi for hire apps also include Uber, Ola, and Rapido.
Don't take non-official taxis, they might take you to wrong hotels, or to a "tourist information centre", and try to sell you overpriced things. To be on the safe side, Check that whether the driver has their official documentation or not.
Taxi rides involving tourists in Delhi almost always involve minor scams. Most of the time, the driver will demand more money than originally agreed. During the ride, prepare a sum of money that is at least the agreed fare and put in your shirt pocket or comparable spot. At the destination, get your belongings out of the car first and leave the door open to slow the driver down if he follows you. Hand the money to the driver without stupidly asking for change and then immediately walk away as quickly as you can in the direction that would be most difficult for him to follow. 


==== Transportation network taxis ====
Delhi is also serviced by various transportation network ("ridesharing") companies including Uber and Ola Cabs. Make sure to check the tariffs in these before you pay. While most of these services accept cash, many can also be linked to online wallet services like Paytm, so overcharging is rarely a risk.


=== By auto rickshaw ===

Auto rickshaws (also called three-wheeled scooters, tuk-tuks or simply autos) are good for shorter trips. Always in a distinctive yellow-and-green livery, auto rickshaws are three-wheeled partially enclosed contraptions that run on CNG and can seat three people in the back. In general, they are much cheaper than taxis and can be hailed from the street. Although by law the rickshaw drivers should charge according to the meter in their vehicle (₹25 for the first two km, ₹8/km after), this rate is unrealistically low and they will almost always try to haggle for price. Try to negotiate a price before entering the vehicle. As rules of thumb, expect even the shortest journey to cost ₹30-40/person regardless of the meter, but you should never need to pay over ₹150 for any trip within the city. If you're overquoted, don't be afraid to walk away. It's usually easy to find another one soon, usually with a driver who won't rip you off.
If you have any trouble with drivers, go to any of the numerous tourist police stations in the city centre and they will give you a complaint slip which will result in a ₹500 fine for the auto driver. There should also be a telephone number written on the vehicle to call in case of any complaint.
There are a number of "Pre-paid" auto stands run by the Police. Tell them where you want to go and pay them upfront. The charge will include ₹5 for the service. You then take the coupon and stand outside where a policeman will direct you to the next available Auto. When your journey is completed you hand the coupon to the auto driver and that's it. Nothing more to pay (despite what they may say).


=== By cycle rickshaw ===

Cycle rickshaws are three-wheeled, pedal/electric powered rickshaws with seats in the back to seat passengers and a driver in the front. They are good for short distances, or places which are too far to walk but too short for taking a bus/taxi/auto rickshaw. Cycle rickshaws don't use meters, so establish a price before getting on. ₹20-50 is reasonable for most journeys of a few km.
Cycle rickshaws are best to use in Old Delhi to visit the intricate galis (walkways) and to enjoy the smells and sounds of the city.
Cycle rickshaws can still be found in some parts of Old Delhi and residential neighbourhoods, but they are becoming less common. In the early 2020s, battery-powered e-rickshaws have largely replaced them, as they are faster, more widely available, and usually cheaper for short trips. Travellers may therefore see fewer traditional cycle rickshaws compared to the past.


=== By electric rickshaw ===
Electric rickshaws, popularly known as tuk-tuk or e-rickshaws, are also used to enjoy the streets of Old Delhi. These are battery-operated alternatives to auto rickshaws and cycle rickshaws because of their low fuel cost, and less human effort compared to cycle rickshaws.
E-rickshaws are now widely available across Delhi and have become the most common form of short-distance transport. They are particularly useful for short trips within neighbourhoods and for last-mile connectivity to and from metro stations, markets, and bus stops. Fares are usually low and fixed per passenger, though it is advisable to confirm the price before boarding. 


=== By car ===

For travelling in Delhi, you could hire a car. The road conditions are generally better than in the rest of India. However, traffic jams is a major concern in Delhi - and traffic in general is more chaotic than in first world countries.
Driving in Delhi can be challenging, especially for those unfamiliar with Indian road conditions. Traffic congestion is common, particularly during rush hours, and road discipline may be different from what drivers from Western countries are used to. Lane discipline is often loosely followed, honking is frequent, and sudden stops or turns are not unusual. First-time visitors from developed countries may find driving stressful, so it is generally recommended to avoid self-driving and instead rely on taxis, rideshare apps, or hired drivers.


=== On foot ===
Much of Delhi is quite pedestrian-hostile. Distances are long, road signage is poor, and in the more tourist oriented areas, you'll be constantly accosted by beggars and touts. Crossing roads often involves wading across multiple lanes of heavy traffic. Try your best to move in a predictable straight line, so vehicles can weave around you. Better yet, latch onto a group of locals and cross in their shadow. If you really want to walk around, these places would be good:

Walk from Rashtrapati Bhavan (President's house) to India Gate on the Kartavya Path (a walk of close to 3–4 km).
Walk from Jama Masjid to Red Fort in the Chandni Chowk area.
Far South Delhi go walk about in the forest. Try starting from south of Indian Institute of Technology through Sanjay Van to Qutub Minar. Note however that Sanjay Van is not always safe, and it is advisable to go there in a group, preferably during daylight.
South Delhi-Green Park-Hauz Khas Village, then to the Hauz Khas ruined madrasa, offers a newer shopping area, an up-market arts village, old ruins, and some quality gardens.


== See ==

Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles
Delhi is known for its impressive range of structures — fortifications, mosques, and tombs — built during the centuries when Delhi was the centre of large Muslim empires. There are dozens of notable sites scattered around the city, and several of them are internationally famous as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Detailed listings of all sights in Delhi can be found in the district articles.
The most visited sites are the Red Fort (the 17th century palace of the Mughal emperor), the Jama Masjid (a vast and beautiful 17th century mosque), the Qutb Minar (a 73-meter high tower, dating to the 13th century but still with well-preserved intricate carvings), Humayun's Tomb (the vast 16th century tomb of the Mughal emperor Humayun), and the Purana Qila (a 16th-century Mughal citadel).
Newcomers often confuse between Delhi and New Delhi. In fact, New Delhi, the capital of India, is a city within the Delhi metropolis. New Delhi was built in 1911–12 under the British rule. Being centrally planned in the modern era, it features wide boulevards, large parks, and roundabouts between its government buildings. Popular sights here are the India Gate, the Kartavya Path "national mall" connecting the main government buildings, and Rashtrapati Bhavan (presidential palace). Many of the most important museums in Delhi are located here too.
Another popular attraction is the Bahá'í Lotus Temple in the South East, a modern structure built with a flower-like shape. It is one of the most visited buildings in the world. The Akshardham is another such attraction in East Delhi.


== Do ==
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles

You can find many major sports venues in Delhi such as the Arun Jaitley Cricket Stadium, the Ambedkar Stadium  for football and the Indira Gandhi Arena - one of Asia's largest indoor arenas in the southeastern corner of Central Delhi. A bit further south is the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, home to the national football team and the venue for major sports events in the city.


=== Events ===
The Republic Day Parade at Kartavya Path in New Delhi is worth watching. It begins on Republic Day in 26 January and lasts for three days. The parade begins with the flag unfurling of by the President. This is followed by marching from several military regiments along with their bands, and tableaux from various states signifying their cultures are displayed. They march from the Rashtrapati Bhavan on the Kartavya Path to the India Gate. After that, they march north to the Red Fort in Old Delhi. A beating retreat ceremony signifies the end of the parade.
During the Independence Day on 15 August, the flag of India is hoisted at the Red Fort, and the Prime Minister addresses the nation. This includes the past year's achievements, current challenges and call for further development. The speech is followed by a march past of the Indian military. Parades and pageants showcase scenes from the independence struggle and India's diverse cultural traditions. The airspace around the Red Fort is declared a no-fly zone during that day.
The New Delhi World Book Fair is India's second-oldest book fair. It is held on mid-January at Bharat Mandapam in South East Delhi.


== Learn ==
Delhi is a key centre of learning in India. The most famous universities in Delhi are JNU, DU, IGNOU, DTU, JMI, IIT and AIIMS. The official website of Delhi government's Directorate of Education is a good starting point for learning more about study opportunities in the metropolis.
Apart from undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral courses, there are many training and diploma-level institutes and polytechnics that cater to the growing demand for skill-based and vocational education. Besides conventional educational institutes, more and more foreigners also make the effort to learn Hindi or Urdu, and Delhi is home to both languages.


== Work ==
Delhi's economy is expanding rapidly. In analogy many interesting work opportunities emerge. Monster, Jobted and other online job platforms are a good starting point to see what kind of jobs are on offer. Traditionally foreigners often work in the social sector or in teaching. Increasingly, however, expats work for multinational companies and even local Indian companies.
There is a great variety of employment opportunities in Delhi for foreigners, whether they would like to work in business, NGOs, educational institutes, or even government. Still, there is one caveat: the labour market in Delhi is highly competitive and so at many prestigious organisations, the number of applicants far exceeds the number of positions available, which allows employers to receive highly talented applicants for rather meagre salaries (especially when compared to other international destinations).


== Buy ==
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles

If you're not afraid to haggle and bump elbows in bazaars, Delhi is a great place to shop. Most of the well-known bazaars are located in the most central parts of Delhi, both Old and New Delhi. Western-style malls are plentiful and are found further south—in South Delhi and South East Delhi, as well as the satellite cities of Gurugram and Noida. Many shopping districts are overcrowded on Saturdays and closed on Sundays.


=== Clothing ===
Delhi is a shoppers' paradise when it comes to clothing. From centuries-old bazaars selling traditional fabrics and bridal wear to trendy street markets and luxury malls with international labels, travellers can find almost any style here. Bargaining is common in street markets, while fixed prices are the norm in malls and branded stores.
If you're looking for ethnic wear, Chandni Chowk can be a good place with historic lanes filled with sari and lehenga shops, ideal for weddings and festive attire. In Karol Bagh you can find affordable salwar kameez, saris, and everyday Indian wear. If you prefer to shop at a chain store, look for FabIndia with multiple outlets around Delhi. They have high-quality handloom cottons and silks in elegant, contemporary cuts.
For Western wear, some options include the Sarojini Nagar Market, famous for trendy, fast-fashion style clothing at bargain prices and the Janpath Market for youth-oriented clothing and accessories, with a bohemian touch. The Select Citywalk Mall (Saket) is a popular mall featuring both Indian and international fashion brands.
There are also some options if looking for both Indian and western clothing. The Lajpat Nagar Central Market is a blend of ethnic and Indo-western outfits at mid-range prices. Shahpur Jat features designer boutiques offering fusion fashion, popular with young professionals. Also, the state-run handicraft market Dilli Haat sells regional textiles, kurtas, and unique handmade clothing.


=== Traditional textiles and shawls ===
Pashmina and Kashmiri shawls are available at government emporiums or Kashmiri shops (authentic ones are expensive and there are fake ones in circulation). Buy with a keen eye.
Block-printed fabrics from Rajasthan and Gujarat; stoles, dupattas, and bedsheets can be found at shops in Chandni Chowk.
Silk & handloom cotton – Banarasi silks, ikat, and khadi are widely sold in FabIndia, Khadi India, and state emporiums. Authentic silk is very expensive.


=== Spices and teas ===
India is world-famous for its spices and teas, and Delhi is one of the best places to buy them. From the old spice bazaars of Old Delhi to modern specialty shops, travellers can find everything from fragrant cardamom, saffron, and cinnamon to masala chai blends and premium Assam or Darjeeling teas. Khari Baoli (Old Delhi) is Asia’s largest spice market, great for spices, dry fruits, and teas. Tea shops sell good-quality Assam, Darjeeling, and masala chai blends.


=== Electronics ===

For computers and software, the best place to look is Nehru Place IT market complex in South East Delhi, an interesting combination of modern technology products and old world marketplace sales techniques. You can find cheap hardware here as well as both original and pirated software. There are also several similar markets in other parts of Delhi, mostly in West Delhi.


=== Books ===
The Indian book industry is huge, producing annually about 15,000 books in English, and obviously far more in Hindi and other native languages. Delhi is a hub of this industry, so there are small, specialist bookstores that abound. Locally produced books can be very inexpensive and many popular Western titles are published and available here for a fraction of their original cost.
In general, good places to buy books are in Old Delhi (Daryaganj neighbourhood and the Nai Sarak Bookshop Area), plus shopping malls at the south.
The Daryaganj Sunday Book Market is a flea market-book market open on Sundays from 10AM to evening, with a vast selection. Bargain for best prices.


== Eat ==
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles

Delhiites complain about many things in their city, but the food will satisfy even the most demanding gourmet. Not only can you find some of the best Indian food on the subcontinent, but there is also an increasing number of excellent (if often pricey) international restaurants offering cuisine from around the world. When ordering, do remember that Delhi is about 1,000 km from the nearest ocean, so vegetarian, chicken and mutton dishes are the way to go.
Do visit Paranthe Wali Gali in Chandni Chowk. This street has shops that make and sell solely parathas (stuffed Indian bread)with pandit ji parathe wale being in the business for over 150 years and many generations. These are available in all the possible flavours and stuffing you may imagine, with hundreds of varieties from bitter gourd to ice cream.
Delhi has arguably the best street food in India. However, do not eat unhygienic or open food. There are plenty of restaurants offering street food in a potentially more hygienic environment.
You can join local groups of foodies who go out regularly to sample and savour what new and old dishes the city has to offer. If you want a fully customized food tour tailored specifically for you, then Food Tour In Delhi is a good choice. The guests can explore the street food of Delhi in a fun and safe manner. Their tours cover food joints which are in business for 50 to 120 years and serve some of the best street food in the world. The tours cover winding streets of Old Delhi as well as swanky upscale markets located all over the city. The food tours are led by chefs and culinary experts with extensive experience and offer facilities such as pickup and drop, unlimited food which covers all major varieties of food available in the city. Another one of the most active groups is Food Enthusiasts of Delhi. They organize regular food walks, better known as Raids to various parts and joints in the city. It's a non-commercial group, brought together by their passion and love for food.


== Drink ==
Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles
Delhi's nightlife scene has changed since the beginning of the millennium. There are plenty of modern, cosmopolitan places to separate you from your rupees. In a desperate attempt to keep the sex ratio vaguely equitable, many lounges and clubs have couples only policies (that is, no single men or men-only groups), enforced with varying degrees of strictness. While everything is supposed to shut down by 1AM, things can keep going much longer.
The coffee culture in Delhi consists mostly of large, heavily standardised chains. The two most common, Barista and Cafe Coffee Day, can be found in multiple locations across the city, most notably around Connaught Place. The UK-based Costa Coffee and the US-based Starbucks have also made a foray into the market. For listings of independent coffee shops, see the district articles.


== Sleep ==

Individual listings can be found in Delhi's district articles
Prices quoted may not include taxes of up to 22.5%, calculated based on the published rack rates - not necessarily the price that you actually pay, which could be discounted. Smoking is not allowed in Delhi hotels.


=== Budget ===
Delhi has plenty of budget accommodation options, priced from ₹400-2,500. Many of them are in the city centre, while others are further south, in the affluent southern areas or towards the airport.


=== Mid-range ===
Delhi's chronic lack of quality hotels has led to a mushrooming of guest houses of widely varying quality and price. The new official 'Delhi Bed and Breakfast scheme' has also contributed a range of private rooms available for bed & breakfast accommodation. These rooms range from cheap dumps to classy rooms in the best areas of Delhi.


=== Splurge ===
Most of Delhi's expensive hotels are in New Delhi, roughly along the axis between Connaught Square and the airport. A few are located in areas further south and west. Prices in this category are generally over ₹8,000.


== Stay safe ==

Many first-time travellers to India find themselves falling victim to scams and touts, and unfortunately Delhi has a lot of both. Be on guard for anybody trying to help you by giving you unsolicited directions or travel advice. Do not blindly rely on the advice of taxi and auto drivers. If this is your first time to India, do not openly admit it, as this will make you more vulnerable to touts.
Delhi is very unsafe for women travellers, and is among the three most unsafe cities for women in India. It is considered as the 'rape capital of the world'. It is not uncommon in some areas to receive lewd remarks or even physical touching. If you are arriving into Delhi for the first time at night, stay in either the airport or station lounge, or well-lit areas until daybreak if you haven't booked a hotel yet. Never use public transport, or travel outside your hotel during the night, to avoid sexual harassment. Dress conservatively (preferably in Indian clothing so as to blend in). Learn to shout and consider carrying mace/pepper spray. It is recommended to walk with a male that you know, to avoid this.
Carry your cash, passport, and cards in a secure money belt, with only enough cash for a few hours at a time in your wallet or other accessible place. Some recommend carrying an expendable wallet with a few ten rupee notes in it in an obvious place such as your hip pocket as a decoy to Delhi's ubiquitous pickpockets.
Several tourist agencies have been known to swindle tourists, such as by changing their travel plans or charging them extra commissions and fees. You should book your flight tickets online, as all the airlines have online booking systems. Otherwise, prepare to spend a good hour sorting through the charges that the tourist agency will charge.
The best way to secure train tickets is by navigating through IRCTC website. If you have problems booking online - the IRCTC site is unreliable - you can buy tickets in person. The best place to do so is at the Tourist Information Centre, these are within transit hubs. Be very careful, there are many scammers surrounding the railway stations looking for anyone on foot and out-of-place who will "help" you find a "ticket office for foreigners", usually in a nondescript building some blocks from a station, where you will be overcharged and cajoled into signing up for cars, tours, etc. When in doubt, look at reviews for the information centre you are at (for example, on Google Maps). Some scammers will stand at the entrance to the station and physically try to block you from entering, demanding to see your tickets (never mind that you need to enter the station to buy tickets!). Remember - you should be able to enter any station just by going through a metal detector. Nobody will check your tickets before you get on a train (As a measure to control crowding at stations, many stations may require you to purchase a platform ticket (usually costs ₹10-20) if you are just visiting and do not have a railway ticket with you.  
If arriving late at night at the airport or railway station, be very wary of taxi drivers trying to scam tired and unprepared tourists. A common scam is to drive you an area where there are roadworks or a roadblock, and tell you that the path to your hotel is blocked off and it's not possible to take you there. They'll then suggest to take you to another hotel, where they receive a commission for bringing customers. They may take you to a number of hotels first which all say they are full up, so as to increase your desperation, and hence openness to paying more. There have been reports also, of bringing tourists to a "travel agent", who will feign ringing your booked hotel to confirm that either the way is blocked, or they are overbooked and there is no room available. If you've let on that you were only staying in Delhi for the night, they may also try to convince you, that there are no hotel rooms available anywhere, and sell you an extremely overpriced private car ride to your next destination. This can be a very confusing and tiring process if you've just come off a long flight, short on sleep.
If you're arriving after midnight, it is therefore highly advisable to have accommodation pre-booked and arrange pick-up from the airport or station with your hotel, or at least have the phone number with you, so that should you get lost or caught in a sticky situation you have someone reliable to call up.
Practically everyone who handles your cash in Delhi will shortchange you, including the clerks at the police taxi kiosk at the airport and ticket sellers at historic sites and museums. It will be your word against theirs, so the only protection is to just not need change. Learn the money as soon as possible.  Count out the smallest sum you can produce that is at least the price you need to pay. If they claim you didn't pay what you actually paid, write the cash off, walk away, and go somewhere else.


=== Delhi Police ===
The Delhi Police (DP) is the police force serving the Delhi metropolis. Some police officers may be corrupt and unhelpful.
Police vehicles (called PCR vans) are parked on almost every major intersection.


== Stay healthy ==

Summer begins in early April and continues till the end of June, with the heat peaking in May. By the latter part of April or during early May. The temperatures regularly exceed 40 °C (104 °F), meaning that proper hydration is of the utmost importance. Keep yourself covered in summers to avoid a heat stroke. Drink a lot of water — around 3 litres a day — particularly in the summer. Keep in mind that the water is almost always manufactured by reverse osmosis (RO). This means that it is close to distilled water, and you might want to mix some ORS / WHO solutions into the water.
Winter arrives in Delhi by late November or early December and continues till mid-February. In winter there can be seasonal fog; on particularly foggy days, it can be difficult to see across the street. If you are flying in or out Delhi during the winters, be aware of fog-related flight delays.
Drink only packaged bottled water to avoid water-related illness. Sticking to freshly- and well-cooked food will lessen your chances on acquiring the "Delhi belly".
Delhi is one of the most polluted cities in the world, with pollution levels often in the "poor", "severe", or "hazardous" range. Keep an eye on air quality data. Air quality is especially bad around the crop burning season, which begins in late September and extends towards early November. Consider wearing a surgical mask or other approved N95/N99 mask, especially if spending an extended time in Delhi or North India. For travellers with significant respiratory problems, a P100 mask isn't overkill, though remember that wearing rubber masks will often cause skin irritation if worn for prolonged periods in high heat and humidity. Additionally, the Oberoi and some other high end hotels have built in air filtration systems, and the additional expenditure may be worth it.


=== Hospitals ===
2 AIIMS (All India Institute of Medical Sciences, pronounced 'aims'), Mahatma Gandhi Marg (metro: AIIMS  2 ). One of Delhi's premier medical institutes. (updated Aug 2026)
3 Apollo Hospital. Apollo's Delhi branch. (updated Aug 2026)
4 Safdarjung Hospital, Mahatma Gandhi Marg (metro: AIIMS  2 ).  (updated Aug 2026)


== Connect ==
Cell phone coverage in Delhi is excellent. There are three major service providers offering a wide variety of plans. Among them are Airtel, Jio and Vi. It might be a good idea to buy a cell phone and use one of those prepaid plans to get yourself connected while you are in the mtropolis.
Phone numbers in Delhi begin with 011, typically followed by eight digits. To call Delhi from outside India you will need to dial the international prefix for your country, followed by India's country code 91. If you want to dial a landline number from a mobile phone, then you have to add 011 before the number.
Dial 112 for any emergency.


== Cope ==
Mobile internet service could be suspended at short notice in the event of major political instability. Water shortages are common in the western suburbs (doesn’t occur in Central Delhi, New Delhi and South Delhi) and do your part by not wasting too much water.

Laundry service is offered in most hotels, even in budget accommodation. If you would rather save the money and do it yourself, buckets are found in almost all bathrooms - but perhaps wash it out well first.
Exercising outdoors is not recommended due to the level of pollution and swimming in rivers is also not recommended. Instead, look for a hotel with a gym or a pool since many offer day passes. You can always try a morning or evening walk in the parks.


=== Embassies ===
Most embassies are in the Chanakyapuri area of New Delhi; see New Delhi#Embassies and High Commissions. However, some are outside the capital city limits, which are listed here.

  Algeria, 2/2, Shanti Niketan, ☏ +91 11 2411-7585, +91 11 2411-8586, fax: +91 11 2411-7590, contact@algerianembassy.co.in.  (updated Feb 2026)
  Angola, 5, Poorvi Marg Vasant Vihar, Vasant Vihar, ☏ +91 11 2614-6195, +91 11 2614-6197, fax: +91 11 2614-6184, xietuang@del2.vsnl.net.in.  
 5 Brunei, August Kranti Marg. High Commission of Brunei Darussalam 
 6 Cambodia, Outer Ring Road, 110017, New Delhi.  
7 Cuba, E-2/5, Vasant Vihar, ☏ +91 91262 62468, secretaria@in.embacuba.cu, consular@in.embacuba.cuMULTIPLE EMAIL. M- Th, 09:00 -13:00.  (updated Apr 2026)
  Maldives, C-31, Anand Niketan, ☏ +91 11 4143-5701, fax: +91-11-4143-5709.  (updated Jul 2017)
 8 Mexico, C, Anand Niketan, 8, Benito Juarez Marg, Block C, Anand Niketan, ☏ +91 11 2411 7180.  (updated Aug 2019)
  North Macedonia, Hauz Khas Enclave K 80 A, ☏ +91 11 4614 2603, fax: +91 11 4614 2604, delhi@mfa.gov.mk.  
 9 Paraguay, ☏ +91 11 42705671, fax: +91 11 42705672. Official M-F 9AM-5PM, consular & visitors 10AM-1PM.  
 10 Peru, D-2/5, Block D, Vasant Vihar, ☏ +91 11 4616 3333.  
  Romania, D 6/6, Vasant Vihar, ☏ +91 11 26140447, fax: +91 11 26140611, newdelhi@mae.ro. Also covers as the embassy of Romania for Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal. (updated Dec 2021)
  Rwanda, 41, Paschimi Marg, Vasant Vihar, ☏ +91 11 2866 1604, fax: +91 11 2866 1605, rwanda@spectranet.com.  
 11 South Africa, B -18, Vasant Marg, Block B, Vasant Vihar, ☏ +91 11 2614 9411.  
 12 Taiwan, 83, Paschimi Marg.  (updated Apr 2026)


== Go next ==
Delhi is a major international transit hub for trains, planes and buses as well as a great connection point for domestic destinations within India. It's also a great base for exploration of the famous hill stations.


=== Nearby ===

Agra and the Taj Mahal are a 3-6 hr drive or 2-5 hr train ride each way. By road, the Taj Mahal can be reached in 3 hrs through Yamuna Expressway from Delhi. Book tickets in the train cars with seats far in advance, and look for the seats put aside especially for tourists. You can also rent a car and driver for the day and shouldn't pay more than ₹5,000 roundtrip (if not less). The Taj Mahal is closed on Friday.
Jaipur and Rajasthan are reachable by plane or overnight train. As of 2026, the fastest trains make the journey to Jaipur in about 4 hours.
Gurugram (Gurgaon) a southern satellite city, is a 1 hr drive or a metro ride away.
The small Sultanpur National Park is described as a birdwatcher's paradise. There are a few daily trains from Delhi to Farrukhnagar stopping at Sultanpur station a couple of kilometres west of the park. It's also possible to take a Delhi metro train or bus to Gurugram and a taxi from there.
Sariska Reserve and National Park, about 200 km west of Delhi is famous as a tiger reserve. Take the train (2-3 hours) or bus to the nearest major city, Alwar, and from there bus or taxi.
Vrindavan an important Hindu pilgrimage destination related to Lord Krishna, reachable by rickshaw from Mathura (which is 2-3 h by train from Delhi towards Agra)


=== Further away in India ===
Bandhavgarh National Park and the Bandhavgarh Fort are the tiger reserves in Madhya Pradesh. This is a tiger preservation project and has the highest density of tigers in India.
Char Dham of Uttarakhand - Delhi is the starting point of the famous pilgrimage centres of the Himalayan state: Badrinath (the abode of Vishnu), Kedarnath (the abode of Shiva), Gangotri and Yamunotri (the origin of sacred rivers Ganges and Yamuna respectively).
Corbett National Park, the first national park of the country, is around 5 hours' drive from Delhi
Dharamsala, the seat of the Dalai Lama's government-in-exile, is 10-12 hr to the north. Tickets can be purchased from Main Bazaar tourist offices, Majnu ka Tilla Tibetan settlement or the ISBT.
Ride the Maharajas' Express, a luxury train running between Delhi and Mumbai.
The holy cities of Haridwar and Rishikesh, in the foothills of the Himalayas, are a 5-6 hr bus or train ride away.
Mussoorie - one of the original British hill stations in India; also known as The Queen of the Hills.
Nainital - another beautiful hill station in the Kumaon hills with the magnificent Naini Lake.
Shimla - the summer capital of British India, now the state capital of Himachal Pradesh. It has many scenic and historic locations and is about an 8 hr drive or 10 hr in a bus. A direct flight from Delhi takes just 1 hr to reach Shimla.


=== International destinations ===
Lahore, in neighbouring Pakistan, also houses Mughal-era architecture. Cross-border bus and train services are suspended since 2019, and the Wagah/Attari border crossing is closed since the border skirmishes in May 2025. So the only remains is by plane.
Kathmandu, in neighbouring Nepal, is a roughly 36+ hr by coach, or longer (but more comfortably) on a combination of train and coach.