Kerala, officially Keralam (Malayalam: കേരളം Kēraḷaṁ, keh-ruh-lluhm), is known as a tropical paradise of waving palms and wide, sandy beaches. The South Indian state is also known as God's own Country. It is a strip of coastal territory that slopes down the Western Ghats in a cascade of lush, green vegetation and reaches the Arabian Sea. Kerala borders the states of Tamil Nadu to the east and Karnataka to the north. It is also known for its backwaters, mountains, coconuts, spices and art forms like Kathakali and Mohini Attam. 

It is one of India's most prosperous states, and a land of diverse religions, boasting Hindu temples, mosques, churches, and even synagogues. With world-class sporting options, Ayurvedic spas and treatments, eco-tourism initiatives, beautiful tall blue mountains, pristine rainforests, golden beaches and an enormous range of accommodation, Kerala has much to offer the visitor.


== Regions ==


== Cities ==

Here are nine of the most notable cities.

1 Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum) — the capital city, famous for its beaches, historical monuments, parks and temples
2 Alappuzha (Alleppey) — heartland of Kerala Backwaters with a natural maze of canals criss-crossing the city, leading to it being called the Venice of the East
3 Kalpetta — capital of Wayanad district, which is home to three wildlife sanctuaries and hill stations
4 Kannur (Cannanore) — a historical town famous for its 'Kalaripayattu' martial arts, 'Theyyam' temple dance, political movements, forts, folklore, hand looms, beaches, coffee-growing hills and spices
5 Kochi (Cochin) — a port city and the largest urban agglomeration, known as the 'Queen of the Arabian Sea' and featuring the ancient cities of Fort Kochi and Mattanchery
6 Kozhikode (Calicut) — heart of the Malabar region and one of the world's oldest thriving trade centres, with many pretty beaches, waterfalls and trekking possibilities, where Vasco da Gama first landed in India
7 Munnar — endless array of rolling tea estates, Eravikulam National Park
8 Sabarimala — beautiful mountain temple that attracts 50 million devotees annually
9 Thekkady — wildlife and boating are the main attractions; scenic place


== Other destinations ==
1 Bekal Fort — a massive coastal fort in north Kerala from the mediaeval era with picture-postcard beauty
2 Athirappilly Falls — the largest waterfall in Kerala, 80 feet tall and situated in Thrissur district. The famous movie Bahubali was shot here.
3 Eravikulam National Park — grasslands, forest and shrublands are criss-crossed by several streams, this provides a habitat for many birds, grazing animals, predators such as the leopard, butterflies unique to the area, amphibians, and sometimes elephants
4 Kerala Backwaters — stretching across central Kerala; no one should miss a boat journey from Kollam to Alappuzha
5 Kovalam Beach — world-famous beach near Thiruvananthapuram
6 Periyar National Park — home to one of India's largest tiger populations
7 Silent Valley National Park — rain forest with several endangered, protected species
8 Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary — caves, waterfalls and pristine forests


== Understand ==

Kerala is blessed with natural beauty – so much so that it is (rightly) called God's Own Country by the tourism department. The state is also considered one of the safest regions in India. Incidents of local people cheating tourists are almost non-existent. Kerala has high standards of living compared to its neighbours and other Indian states, and has indices such as education and healthcare on par with developed countries. Therefore, tourists can relax without being pursued by taxi drivers, touts or guides, though there are some beggars who have migrated from poorer states. 
Abundant rainfall means that lush greenery lingers pretty much throughout the year. A holiday here is an opportunity for rejuvenation. You can get an Ayurvedic oil massage, spend a day or two on a houseboat with nothing to do but watch coconut trees pass by, or just laze around on Kovalam or Varkala beaches. Thus, tourism is more experiential here, rather than being devoted to seeing highly touristed sights. Kerala was named as one of the "ten paradises of the world" and "50 places of a lifetime" by the National Geographic Traveler magazine.


=== History ===
The ancient period saw the rise and fall of the first and second Chera empires, which were the only two periods when Kerala was united under a monarch. Kerala is mentioned in the writings of many Greek, Roman, Arabic, European and Jewish travelers and merchants from the 1st millennium BCE. It was known for the spices that were grown in the lush hills of the Western Ghats. During the Middle Ages, there were three powerful kingdoms – Kolathiri/Cherakal in the far north, Samuthiri/Zamorin in Calicut (north and central), Travancore in the south. The Portuguese were the first to discover a direct sea route between Lisbon and Calicut in Kerala, and this marked the beginning of European colonisation in the country. Soon the Dutch, French, Venetians and British were all lured by the wealth of spices and silk, and came to establish colonies. The defeat of the Dutch by the Travancore Army at the Battle of Colachel, and the decline of Portuguese Empire and French problems in Europe, resulted in the British gaining the full influence in India, and the annexation of the Malabar region (Kolathiri and Samuthiri) into the British Madras Presidency.
However, the Kingdoms of Tiruvithamkoor (Travancore) and Kochi (Cochin) enjoyed some autonomy under the British. After Indian independence, the kingdoms chose to accede into the Indian Union, and were later merged into the State of Travancore-Cochin. With the linguistic reorganisation of states, the Malayalam-speaking regions of Malabar and Travancore-Cochin were integrated into the State of Kerala on 1 November 1956. This realised a united Kerala, a dream held since the partition of the ancient Kerala empire of Cheras in the eighth century. Today, people in Kerala live a largely traditional lifestyle, and much of the rich culture and heritage of the region is well-preserved.
November 1 is celebrated as Keralappiravi (Birth of Kerala) Day (also observed as Malayalam Divasam or Malayalam Day).
Kerala also played host to the first Jewish, Christian and Muslim communities of India. While the Jewish population declined following the establishment of Israel, Kerala still has a synagogue in Kochi. Kerala is known for its secularism and peaceful co-existence and brotherhood of the three major religions - Hinduism, Islam and Christianity.


=== Geography ===
Kerala is wedged between the Western Ghats on the eastern side and the Arabian Sea on the west, thus having a wide range of topography from high altitude mountains to golden beaches, and is criss-crossed by 44 rivers. The tributaries, unique backwaters, lagoons and numerous small islands provide scenic attractions.


=== Climate ===
Kerala, being close to the equator, has a tropical climate. Kerala experiences heavy rains almost throughout the year, and is one of the wettest areas on Earth.
Kerala has three distinct seasons:

Summer lasts from mid-February to mid-May. The tropical sun is hot and temperatures can reach 35 °C (95 °F) in the afternoons.
The South-East monsoon is in place from mid-May until early September. Also the North-East Monsoon winds bring heavy showers.
Winter is mild and lasts from about mid-October to early February. Heavy rains occur from the last week of September until early November, due to the retreat of the South-East monsoon. There is no snow in Kerala, although it is quite cold and misty in the mountain regions.
When in Kerala, carry an umbrella no matter what time of the year it is. A sudden shower in summer will leave you drenched if you are unprepared. The Kerala sun coupled with the high rate of humidity can be unforgiving in the summer months.
The temperature averages around:

28°C–36°C daytime, 24°C–28°C at night in summer seasons of March, April
20°C–28°C daytime, 18°C–25°C at night for the rest of the year
Temperatures may drop to 10 °C (50 °F) or lower during November and December in hilly areas of the Western Ghats, especially at popular hill stations like Munnar and Wynad. This results in misty days and freezing nights coupled with light cold showers. However, in other places, the temperatures never drop below 15°C.
Summers have become hotter: though the maximum temperature has never risen higher than 36°C, the rising humidity has made summers difficult. The height of the Kerala summer is normally between mid-March and May. Wear only light, loose cotton clothes during this season. Consider a trip to hilly areas, where the temperatures never exceed 26°C.
Kerala experiences mild winds throughout most of the year.
The most pleasant time to visit is from September to March, when the weather is ideal for sightseeing, trekking and boating.


=== Religion ===
Hinduism is the largest religion in the state. Hinduism in Kerala differs from that elsewhere in India, due to assimilation of traditional Dravidian culture, and later due to the unique practice of Marumakathyam (matrilineal system), which made the society highly matriarchal unlike patriarchal values found elsewhere in India. This also helped the society to be tolerant to cross-caste/religious marriages and co-living systems. Also, Kerala is the last place in the world where ancient Vedic tantric rites are still practiced widely.
Kerala's Islam is also unique. Kerala's trading relations with West Asia brought Islam to its shores around 600 CE soon after its formation in Arabia, through Arab traders. Islam entered Kerala with an official fanfare and patronage from the ruling Hindu Chera Emperor and since then, Islam has become one of the most popular religions in the state. Unlike other parts of India, Kerala Muslims are mainly descended from Arabs through inter-religious marriages between fisherman families, who are thus called Mappillas (meaning sons-in-law). Unlike other parts of India, Muslims were given high-profile rankings in Kerala society by ruling Hindu Rajas and many of them are placed as close companions of ruling elite. Kerala's Islam follows the Shafi'i School of Islam like many Arab countries such as Yemen, and unlike the Hanafi school elsewhere in India.
Christianity, too, has made a unique mark in Kerala's history. St Thomas the Apostle came in 52 CE and spread the message of Christ. This resulted in a large influx of Syrian immigrants who soon assimilated with the locals. Kerala has the largest number of churches in India. In terms of denominations, Kerala is home to Roman Catholic Latin Rite, Syro-Malabar and Syro-Malankara denominations, two major Orthodox denominations, two major Protestant denominations and one Nestorian church, apart from innumerable Charismatic/Independent congregations.
For thousands of years, Buddhism was the most influential religion in Kerala. It was only in the 11th and 12th centuries that Brahmanism took hold in the state and Buddhism waned. Today the state has a small Buddhist population and almost all famous Buddhist temples in Kerala has been converted into large Hindu temples, some still having Buddhist saints worshiped. The famed Vadakkumnath Temple in Thrissur was a large Buddhist Vihara, which was converted into a Hindu temple.
Jainism is a smaller minority religion, with followers mainly in Wayanad, Kozhikode and Kochi. Jainism reached Kerala during the Maurya period, when the Great Mauryan Emperor Chandragupta Maurya retired to Shravanabelagola near Mysore in 3rd century BCE, though many Jain monks accompanied him. Jainism became popular in Kerala, with many Jain temples, until 6th century CE when there was a revival of Hinduism in Kerala. The decline of Jains resulted in many Jain temples being converted into large Hindu temples. The classic example is the famous Irinjalakoda Bharatha Temple which originally was a Jain temple dedicated to Saint Bharatheswara, a Jain monk, which was converted into a Hindu temple in 5th century CE as Lord Bharatha (Brother of Sree Rama). Many Jain temples were later demolished during Tipu Sultan's raid.
Sikhism also has many followers in the state, mainly those who have migrated from the Indian state of Punjab.

Judaism has existed in Kerala for about 2,000 years, and today a minority of Jews live around Kochi, although there was a mass migration in the 1950s following the founding of Israel. Jews arrived in Kerala during the Crusades when the fall of Jerusalem caused many Jewish immigrants to take refuge in Kerala. The Chera Kulashekara Emperor invited Jews to settle in Kochi and Kollam areas and issued them various grants and privileges. Unlike elsewhere, Kerala is one of the few places in the world where Jews lived peacefully with Muslims and Christians. Cochini Jews became the largest segment of Jews and several famous synagogues were established, though the first Jewish synagogue, which was established in the 15th century (the Commonwealth's oldest synagogue), is the only remaining one. During Portuguese rule, several synagogues were raided and many were demolished, until the Kochi Kingdom officially asked the Portuguese to stop attacking Cochini Jews. Following the establishment of the modern State of Israel in 1948, most of the Cochin Jews moved to Israel, and few remain in Kerala today. This resulted in the existence of only two synagogues in Kerala: the Paradesi Synagogue of Mattachery (a must-see while in Kochi) and a small one in Paravur. Synagogues are off-limits to tourists on Saturdays as it is the Sabbath.
Due to its strong socialist values and history of several communist movements, there are many atheists in the state.
Hindus constitute about 56% of the population, Muslims 24% and Christians account for about 19%. Communal and sectarian tensions are rare. Kerala is considered the most peaceful place in South Asia.


=== Culture ===
Unique to Kerala, the Malayali culture is derived from ancient Tamil-Dravidian practices combined with Indo-Aryan culture, with influences from China, Japan, Arab countries, Portugal, Holland and even from the British. There are many Tamil-Sanskrit elements, resulting in many unique practices and customs. Each community in Kerala has its own unique version of Malayali culture which will not be found outside Kerala.
Hindu influence brought Ayurveda (traditional medicine) into prominence. Kalaripayattu (Kerala's traditional martial art) adopted many Hindu practices. While religious beliefs and their associated myths and legends are well rooted in the Malayali psyche, the influence of communism and the Kerala renaissance has resulted in separation of religion from the daily routine of life.
Kerala architecture has much Tibetan-Chinese influence, due to its seclusion from other parts of India when the Western Ghats precluded Tamil influence. Most of the buildings have gabled, tiled roofs and a heavy use of wood with prominent slanting windows and ornamental flora designs. The Sree Padmanabhapuram Palace near Thiruvananthapuram is a classic example of this.
Dance, music and drama all have distinctive styles and attract large crowds.
To experience the entire spectrum of arts and culture of Kerala in one place, try the Annual Kerala State School Art Festival, normally held in December or January. The location rotates between various district headquarters. This was constituted by the government as a competition amongst school children to promote Kerala arts and culture. This is Asia's largest festival according to the Guinness Book of records, with more than 82 art forms show-cased during its ten-day duration.


==== Dance ====

Kerala has numerous indigenous dance forms:

Chavittu Nadakam (Malayalam: ചവിട്ടുനാടകം) – This is a highly colourful Christian classical art form that originated in Gothuruth village, North Paravur. It is noted for its attractive make-up of characters, their elaborate costumes, detailed gestures and well-defined body movements presented in tune with the rhythmic playback music and complementary percussion. This art form highly resembles European opera. Chavittu Nadakam is believed to have originated during the 16th century AD. This form of play is prevalent among the Christian community in the districts of Alappuzha, Ernakulam and Thrissur.
Kathakali – Kerala's celebrated classical ballad with use of large costumes and elaborate make-up. It is a dance drama, noted for wide range of characters. Each character has a special kind of costume and make-up, special movements, particularly extensive expressions, refined gestures, and innovative themes. The dance is accompanied by anchor music and precise drumming. The Kathakali Music is unique as it varies in accordance to expressions and reactions. Whilst traditional Indian epics, mainly the Ramayan and Gita Puran, constitute the main story-boards for the dance drama, many international versions like Shakespearian-Homer-Biblical works are now taken as themes. A glimpse of Kathakali can be seen in shows organised by cultural centres across Kerala (including those at Thekkady), which showcase the art and educate people about it.
Koodiyattom –  An ancient form of theatre with a legacy of more than 2,000 years. This is very stylised Sanskrit theatre and recognised by UNESCO as a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity. Most of the characters are noted for Sanskrit recitations and highly stylised movement, particularly eye expressions. Some parts of the stories are expressed only using the eyes.
Margam Kali (Malayalam: മാര്‍ഗ്ഗംകളി) – One of the ancient group dances of Kerala practised by Saint Thomas Christians. The Margamkali is a ritual folk dance in which twelve people dance around a traditional oil lamp (Nilavilakku). They represent the 12 apostles, and Christ is represented by the lamp. They perform the dance wearing the traditional white dhoti and a peacock feather on the turban. Margamkali is essentially famous among the Syrian Christians of Kottayam and Thrissur districts.
Mohiniyattom – This classical artform of Kerala is a subtle and graceful dance performed by women in traditional costume. Most of the themes are poems, unlike other classical dances which have an emphasis on Hindu mythology.
Theyyam – This ritualistic rite is performed in the temples of Malabar. It is an ancient tradition, whereby worship takes the form of performance, rather than formal worship. While dressed in Theyyam costume, performers are considered gods and goddesses. There are nearly 41 various types of Theyyam, each noted for its own legend and stories. A visit to any Malabar temples during Theyyam season (Dec-Mar) is advised.


==== Music ====
Kerala has its own indigenous music and orchestration.

Melam – This is a percussion ensemble, with several variants differing in the number of percussive instruments used, as well as the style of playing them. Melam is popular and is mostly used during temple festivals, when more than six hours of continuous playing is the norm. Melam attracts large crowds and creates wonderful notes. The Thrissur Pooram has the largest Melam, with more than 300 musicians in the ensemble.
Sopanam – Kerala's unique classical music has slow, graceful rhythms. Most of the original versions are poems, and the music is coupled with poetic expression and style. Sopanam is now limited to regular performances at temple events.
Mappila songs – This music is associated with the local Muslim community. Traditionally, the songs were performed in Mappila Malayalam – a mixture of Arabic and Malayalam - and most tell stories of social systems and customs. Today, Mappila songs are popular amongst youngsters, using Malayalam lyrics. Their tunes sound a mix of the ethos and culture of Kerala as well as West Asia.
Poems: play a pivotal role in Malayali music. Kerala is well known for its poetic traditions, and the many poems of high literary value. Aksharaslokam (Poem recitations) is a common sight in many village temple platforms and during festival times, where poets recite poems and challenge other poets to start their recitation with the phrase, the former has ended his recitation.
Film Music – As elsewhere in India, film music is popular, and Malayalam songs can be heard everywhere.


==== Martial arts ====
Kalarippayattu (Kalari) is believed to be one of the oldest martial arts in the world. Kalaripayattu has many styles, the best known being Northern Style and Southern Style. While the former is focused on using various weapons, the Southern style uses powerful strokes with the bare hand. The knowledge of vital spots, known as Marma, on the human body helped Kalaripayattu warriors make blows that could freeze or kill opponents.
Bodhidharma, a Buddhist monk, mastered Kalaripayattu while in Kerala, and later took it with him to China while he was spreading Buddhism. He taught it to the Buddhist monks in China, which gave rise to Shaolin Kung Fu, which in turn, gave rise to all other forms of Kung Fu, as well as Karate.
The British Government passed legislation banning Kalari, considering it a potential danger, causing a brief decline. Today, it is a popular sport and exercise option which gets international attention. Many cultural centres showcase Kalari techniques, one of them being the Kalari Centre at Thekkady, as well as schools in Thiruvanathapuram, Kottayam and locations in north Malabar.


==== Drama ====
Drama was once a very popular medium in Kerala, and played a large role in the spread of Communist ideology and the social renaissance of the region. Due to the popularity of television soaps and cinema, the popularity of live drama has waned. However, some high-end dramas involving technology and innovative themes are gaining popularity in major metropolitan areas. Thrissur is the hub of Kerala drama, with many theatres hosting regular shows. Thrissur also hosts the annual International Drama Festival of Kerala, attracting prominent dramatists from around the world. Most Kerala dramas are performed in Malayalam, and the stories based on social realities. Some temples offer dramas as part of their temple festival programs.


==== Cinema ====
Malayalam cinema tends to focus on social realities, and avoids the glitz and glamour prevalent in the Bollywood and Tamil movie industries. For Malayalam movies shown in local theatres, there is no sub-titling, except for those movies nominated for out of state awards. Thiruvananthapuram hosts the annual International Film Festival of Kerala which focuses on Asian and Latin movies.


==== Mythology ====
Kerala is steeped in the mythology of the supreme god Ganesha, who Shiva decapitates He later becomes Gajanana before replacing the head with that of an elephant, and the tale of Daksha, who is decapitated by Shiva's forces after his disrespectful behavior towards Shiva and his wife Sati. This event led to the creation of the Shakti Peehas.


=== Traditional dress ===

The traditional costumes of Kerala are called mundu and neriyathu, for both men and women. Sarees and blouses form the traditional costume of Kerala women. Kerala Mundu is popular in the state and is worn by many men. It's a special white/cream-coloured dhoti worn across the waist. The dhothi has a golden threadwork as a strip running down from the waist to the bottom, and the width of the gold thread determines the cost. It is an elegant costume, mostly used for ceremonial purposes. The women's Mundu Neriyathu is similar and has an upper shawl of same material. White is one of the most preferred colour of clothing in the state. Today, different versions of Mundu and Neriyathu with different colours and motifs are available.


=== Government ===
Kerala is a traditionally socialist-leaning state and both the major parties, Indian National Congress and CPI(M), are socialist parties. It also has a strong communist movement and is one of the few places in the world where a communist-led government was democratically elected to power. Kerala's communism today resembles the Chinese way in that it focuses on a market economy and reforms, although officially they oppose capitalism. Kerala has a tradition of two major alliances: one led by the Communist Party called LDF (Left Democrats) and another led by the Indian National Congress called UDF (United Democrats). These tend to alternate in power every five years.


=== Economy ===
Kerala has been through a period of strong growth with one of the highest per capita incomes in the country, and poverty levels are very low compared to elsewhere in India. Most households have family members working outside the state, typically the Middle East, and their remittances make up approximately 20% of the economy. Agriculture focuses on cash-crop cultivation such as rubber, tea, coffee, spices and coconut plantations. Tourism now accounts for a significant part of the state's economy.


=== Visitor information ===
Official websites:

Government of Keralam
Keralam Tourism


== Talk ==

Malayalam is the official language of the state and is understood by virtually all of the state's residents. Given its unique script, complex grammar, difficult pronunciation, and agglutinative morphology, Malayalam is regarded by many, also in India, as the most difficult language to learn in India, a fact which almost all Keralites take great pride in.
In urban areas, Tamil, Hindi and English are widely spoken. As in the rest of Southern India, Hindi is not as widely understood in the countryside and people are more likely to readily respond in English than Hindi. As Tamil and Malayalam are closely related, locals may understand spoken Tamil, albeit with some difficulty.
Keralites are typically proficient in 3-4 languages. One may argue that the Keralites are the polyglots of India.
Almost all bus routes and other important signs, including name boards, are written in Malayalam and some are also in English. Most city bus destinations are prominently written in Malayalam, some having English signage represented in small fonts which are often difficult to read, though all bus conductors and ticket checkers understand basic English. Most Kerala government offices use only Malayalam signage and most Kerala government documents such as receipts and bills are in Malayalam, though there will usually be English-speaking staff on duty.


== Get in ==


=== By plane ===
There are four airports in Kerala, with flights to domestic and international destinations: Kannur Kochi (Cochin), Kozhikode (Calicut), and Thiruvananthapuram. The airports have several carriers operating international flights.

Cochin International Airport (COK IATA) is the largest airport in the state, as well as the first Indian airport with solar-powered operations, with regular flight connections to most parts of India, of the Middle East, Southeast Asia, Sri Lanka and the Maldives. Europe- and U.S.-bound passengers need to transit in the Middle East, Delhi or Mumbai.
Thiruvananthapuram International Airport (TRV IATA) has regular connections to major cities of India, and to the Middle East, Southeast Asia, Sri Lanka and the Maldives. Charter flights for tourism from London, New York and Moscow operate to Thiruvananthapuram.
Calicut International Airport (CCJ IATA) is a new airport with limited international flights other than to the Middle East.
20 to 25 international carriers offer flights to Kerala. Apart from international carriers, Air India offers international connections from the three airports. Domestic destinations accessible by direct flights from these airports include Chennai, Bangalore, Mumbai, Agatti, Hyderabad, Mangalore, Goa and Delhi. There are daily, and some bi-daily flights, to most Indian cities from Calicut, Cochin and Thiruvananthapuram. Many of the major Indian low-cost carriers (LCC) such as SpiceJet and IndiGo offer daily flights from major Indian cities.


=== By train ===
Indian Railways operates several trains to, from and within Kerala. Trains into Kerala start from neighbouring states like Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Long-haul direct train services from cities like Delhi and Mumbai are also available.
Log on to the Indian Railways booking site to book tickets online or walk up to any railway station to book tickets between any two destinations in India.
Trains are the most popular method of transport and almost all trains in Kerala originate or terminate in Thiruvananthapuram or Ernakulam, and are usually heavily booked. Buy your tickets as early as possible. Another option is using Tatkal. You need to pay more depending on the class of accommodation, but have a chance of getting a seat. Tatkal is an emergency service, hence its booking is open just 24 hours before departure. The Tatkal booking starts at 10AM on the previous day of travel for AC classes, and 11AM on the previous day of travel for non AC sleeper class. Make sure that you have an Indian railway website login and valid identification card with you during booking. Some travel agents have authorised booking quotas for certain trains.
The luxury tourist train The Golden Chariot offers a South Indian Rail Tour, which includes many parts of Kerala. This is a good way to visit the South Indian states on a tight schedule. The train starts from Bangalore and covers Chennai, Pondicherry, Tiruchirappalli, Madurai, Thiruvananthapuram, Alappuzha, Kochi and back to Bangalore. The 7 night/8 day package tour costs US$3,000-7,000 depending upon the class taken.


=== By bus ===

Inter-state private and government buses operate between neighbouring states. Usually, the journey is performed at night to escape the heat of the day. The most common inter-state bus is Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC-Karnataka) with daily buses from most major cities of Kerala to Bangalore, Mysore and Mangalore. Tamil Nadu State Bus like SETC also operates regularly from Kerala. Kerala's state bus- KRSTC-Kerala do have regular buses to most nearby cities in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. KRSTC-Kerala also operates a few Volvo AC buses to Bangalore and Coimbatore.
However private bus companies operate more buses than government options. Most of them are well maintained. Kallada, Shama, and KPN are the major players. Raj National and a few others offer pan-India operations. Kallada, KPN and Shama have regular buses to Bangalore, Chennai and many other places in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.
It is recommended to consider booking long-distance bus tickets on air-conditioned Volvo buses operated by all operators as the quality of the other buses varies significantly.


=== By road ===
Kerala is well connected by national highways:

NH 17 (connecting Mumbai to Kochi via Western coastal side of Goa, Karnataka and almost all towns of Malabar like Kannur, and Kozhikode),
NH 47 (connecting Salem with Kanyakumari via Coimbatore,  Palakkad, Thrissur, Kochi, Alappuzha, Kollam, and Thiruvananthapuram
NH 212 (connecting Kozhikode to Mysore via Wayanad),
NH 49 (connecting Kochi to Rameswaram via Munnar and Madurai),
NH 220 (connecting Kollam to Theni in Tamil Nadu via Kottayam, Kanjirapally, Kumily and enters Tamil Nadu at Kumily),
NH 208 (connecting Kollam with Madurai via Punalur, Shenkottai, Tenkasi) and
NH 213 (connecting Palakkad with Kozhikode)
NH 212 is a national highway in Southern India, which connects Kozhikode in Kerala with Kollegal in Karnataka via Mysore
Most of the NH roads are dual carriageways. As vehicle density is high in Kerala, accidents are common. Be cautious while driving here.
As Kerala receives heavy rainfall throughout the year, road conditions are inconsistent. Therefore, expect delays, especially in monsoon season and afterwards (June–October) even on the National Highways.


=== By boat ===
Kochi is a major cruise port and a large international cruise terminal is under construction. Once completed, regular cruises will operate from Kochi. A regular luxury cruise between Colombo, Male and Kochi is now operational. All Lakshadweep-bound cruises originate in Kochi and make return trips.
Private yachts and other sea-going boats regularly call at Kochi.


== Get around ==
Kerala is connected by many modes of transport. The flat southern side is better connected than mountainous north.


=== By train ===

Trains are good for long-distance travel within the state. Most trains are long-distance trains with stops at many of Kerala's stations. Short-distance trains are mainly intercity passenger trains, connecting only major cities like Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi, Palakkad, Alappuzha, Kollam, Kottayam, Kozhikode, Kannur and Thrissur.
There are two Vande Bharat Express trains that run the length of the state, from Kasaragod to Thiruvananthapuram. They are identified by their distinct colours. The blue and white Vande Bharat Express train runs through Kottayam, while the orange and white one runs through Alappuzha.


==== Train fares ====
The average fare for a 200 km distance for different classes is:

First Class AC: ₹1,200
Two Tier AC: ₹617
Three Tier AC: ₹430
AC Chair Car: ₹203
Sleeper Class: ₹120
Second class seat in Express train: ₹70
Second class seat in Passenger train: ₹30


=== By car ===
Roads remain the primary mode of transport. The primary roads are NH 47, NH 49, NH 17 and NH 212 and are all National Highways. The NH 47 is one of the busiest as it connects Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram. The traditional primary road is MC Road, which covers some of the most scenic places in south Kerala. However, travel on the NH 47 cuts the time  between Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram by at least half an hour.
State Highways connect almost all parts of Kerala. Most of the state highways are two-lane roads.  Due to heavy rains, potholes are common. Some of the wettest areas, like Alappuzha, Kottayam, and Iddukki, have badly damaged roads.


=== By bus ===

There two kinds of state-owned KSRTC buses: KSRTC (Kerala) and KSRTC (Karnataka) from the neighboring state, which buses drive into Kerala. Take care, on the website of KSRTC (Kerala) many bus routes and bus departures are not shown. The website only shows the few buses in which seats can be reserved. Generally KSRTC (Kerala) serves just about every town and many villages. So there is big chance that you can reach your destination by bus, possibly with one or two transfers. If you want to know certain bus routes or timetables, ask in a central bus station.
Kerala has a good network of private and KSRTC buses. Bus fare is usually ₹7 for 3 km with the Fast Passenger and Super-fast services of KSRTC charging a marginally higher price. The air-conditioned Volvo service operated by KSRTC charges around 250% the cost of ordinary fares. In every city of Kerala, there are separate private and KSRTC bus stations. In some cities, KSRTC buses service private bus stations, but never vice versa. Minibuses are more popular because they move slowly and the crew are courteous.
For distances exceeding 100 km, night services are better because daytime traffic is slow.


=== By taxi ===
Taxis are a good but expensive way to cover short distances. Negotiate the price before entering a taxi. Ambassador and Indica Taxis are the most common services. Ambassador Taxis are rarely air-conditioned and are most commonly used in Thiruvananthapuram. Indica is more common in Ernakulam, Thrissur and Kottayam areas. Most of the Indica taxis are air-conditioned. The normal rate is ₹ 50 as the minimum rate for 2 km and ₹20 per km later. A/C cabs charge normally 10 to 15% more. In Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram, day cabs are available and charge ₹ 450 for a four-hour trip within city limits or ₹850 for an eight-hour trip within city limits. Most these will be Indica.
Terrain vehicles and four-wheel SUVs are the most common form of taxi in hilly areas.


=== By auto-rickshaw ===
Auto-rickshaws, also called autos, are a convenient mode of transport for short-distance travel. By law the auto driver must start a meter for every journey. However, at times this law is ignored. So politely ask the driver to start the meter at the start of the journey, to avoid arguments at the end of the trip. Most of the larger railway stations and all the airports have pre-paid auto-rickshaw and/or taxi stands. Just tell them your destination and you will get a slip of paper with the destination and amount written on it. Pay the printed price and nothing more.


=== By ferry ===
Kerala's rivers, backwaters and lagoons making travel by ferry an effective service. In some places, ferries are more popular and easier than road transport. Most of the places in the Alappuzha-Kuttanad area are connected by regular ferry services.
The main waterways route, served by Kerala Water Transport Department boats, are as follows

(1) Vembanad Lake - 52 km², connecting between districts of Alappuzha and Kottayam and numerous of canals in Kuttanad
(2) Ashtamudi Lake - 200 km², connecting points in Kollam district
(3) Ernakulam - Vypeen - Fort Cochin ferry (Cochin port & harbour)
(4) Muhamma - Kumarakom, connecting islands within Kottayam district
(5) Vaikom - Thavanakkadavu, connecting Kottayam with Ernakulam districts
(6) Payyannur - Parassinikkadavu, connecting various parts of Kannur district
In addition, National Waterway NW 3 runs from Kollam in south Kerala to Kottapuram in Thrissur district, and is served by large boats.


=== By plane ===
Helicopter and air-taxi services are available between Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram. These services connect the two major metros with District Headquarters and are expensive.
There are no intra-city train/metro services in any Kerala city. Kochi has its own metro services, operating within the city limits. A dedicated Inter-city Rail called MEMU is under construction between Kochi and Kollam.


== See ==

Kerala gets rain for at least 7-8 months annually and the forests are classified as rainforests. There are many opportunities to trek, camp and see wildlife.


=== Scenic attractions ===
The Backwaters of Kerala are a maze of lagoons criss-crossed with rivers, shallow pools and canals, all separated from the sea by sand banks. Backwaters are present throughout the state but Alappuzha and Kottayam are most notable in this regard.

The Blue Mountains of the Western Ghats, popularly known as Nilgiris, are close to Thiruvananthapuram and there are numerous hill stations in this area. The most popular is Munnar, the honeymoon capital of the state. The highest peak of the Western Ghats is Anamudi (2,695 metres), which is good for trekking. The area is also home to several sanctuaries and forest reserve areas. There are more than two dozen waterfalls, both large and small, with numerous rapids and springs. The largest waterfalls are at Athirampally, where three milky waterfalls fall at great speed.

Kerala has 650 km of coastline and numerous beaches. Popular recreational beaches include Alappuzha Beach, Kollam Beach, Cherai Beach, Muzhappilangadu beach and Varkala Beach. Some of these beaches also have historical significance such as Kozhikode Beach where Vasco da Gama first landed in India and Kovalam Beach near Thiruvananthapuram, a centre of Hippy counter-culture in the 1960s.


=== Historical monuments ===
Kerala offers numerous historical monuments that can be found in many cities. It hosts the Cherman Perumal Mosque in Kodungallor which is the world's second oldest intact mosque and is home to many rare artefacts. There are forts in Bekal, Palakkad and Thalassery from the pre-British Raj era that are worth exploring. The state's most palaces are the Hill Palace in Kochi and the Palaces at Sree Padmanabhapuram, 30 km from Thiruvananthapuram.


=== Eco-tourism villages ===
Kerala was the first state to formally embrace the eco-tourism concept in South Asia, and has made considerable strides in this respect. The Akkalum Tourist Village in Thiruvananthapuram has a floating bridge and beautiful, landscaped gardens and many famous statues and sculptures dot the area. Kumbalangi Model Village for Sustainable Tourism near Kochi was a once sleepy fishing village, and now popular visitor attraction with a planned focus on sustainability. Thenmala Eco-Tourist Village in Kollam is the first such place in India and focusses on the natural environment. Its numerous exhibits include 27 rare trees, many sculptures, and a large musical fountain.


=== Religious attractions ===
Kerala is famous for its pilgrimage options. Most of the religious sites are rooted in myths and legends, and many have historical tales of more than 1,000 years to tell. Finding a temple, church or mosque is easy, as houses of worship are almost omnipresent. Kerala is famous for its religious harmony. Keralites are religious and religious functions dominate all walks of life. This does not mean that Keralites are close-minded; it's an open society that accepts respectful debate and discussions about religion.
There are often Hindu temples, Christian churches, Muslim mosques, and even Jain temples in the same city. While in Kerala, note the interesting architecture of many Muslim mosques. Unlike other parts of India, Islamic architecture in Kerala resembles Kerala temple architecture without much Persian influence. However, many new mosques are built in Arab style due to the growing Arab influence in Kerala society.
Normally in Kerala, mosques and churches are referred as palli, not masjids as they are elsewhere in India.


== Do ==


=== Ayurveda ===
Due to increasing tourism, Ayurvedic spas have become popular for light massages and pleasure treatments. However, this practice is not evidence-based, so for medical treatment, prefer "allopathic" hospitals (i.e. hospitals that provide evidence-based treatments) over Ayurvedic ones.


=== Cruises ===
A cruise on the Backwaters of Kerala is a popular visitor pastime. Rent a houseboat from either Kumarakom or Alappuzha. An individual houseboat can be rented in 24-hour and 12-hour blocks. Rates differ according to the season and duration.
Many tourist villages offer boating opportunities which are excellent for sightseeing. In general, most villages on or near water will offer a means of transport on their respective body of water.


=== Festivals ===
Kerala is considered a land of festivals, with numerous festivals falling throughout the year. The national festival of Kerala is Onam, marking ten-day-long festivities across the state, between August and September. The second biggest festival is Christmas due to the many Christians in the state, celebrated in grand zest in many cities, particularly in Kochi and Kottayam. All Muslim festivals are celebrated among the community in grand way, throughout the state. Apart from major religious festivals, most temples host annual festivals as part of anniversary celebrations, famous for parades of decorated elephants, temple orchestration and fireworks. The most famous is Thrissur Pooram, celebrated in the Thrissur city during April–May.
Other major festivals are Vishu (Malayalam New Year's day, mostly on April 14th), Thiruvathira (considered sacred for Hindu women, celebrated during December) and Holy Easter Week. National secular holidays like Independence Day (August 15th), Republic Day (January 26th), Naval Week (December 1st week), and Nehru Trophy Vallam Kalli (Snake-boat race in Alappuzha on 2nd Saturdays of August) are grandly celebrated in various cities.


==== Onam ====
Onam is the biggest festival in Kerala. It is the National Festival of Kerala with State holidays on 4 days, from Onam Eve (Uthardom) to the 4rd Onam Day. It is also one of the most secular festivals. Onam Festival falls during the Malayalam month of Chingam (Aug - Sep) and marks the homecoming of mythical King Mahabali, whom Malayalees consider their king. Onam recalls Kerala's agrarian past, as it's considered a harvest festival.
Onam festivities last for ten days and showcase Kerala culture and tradition. Intricately decorated Pookalam (floral carpets), the mammoth Onasadya (the festival feast), breathtaking Snake Boat Race and the exotic Kaikottikali dance are some of the most remarkable features of Onam, Kerala's harvest festival. Though the festive mood is spread everywhere in Kerala, the focal point of Onam celebrations is Kochi. The ten-day festival begins with Aathachamayam (The Royal Parade on Aatham Day) in Thripunithara (a suburb of Kochi City). The colourful parade depicts all the elements of Kerala culture with more than 50 floats and 100 tableaux. The main center of festival is at Thrikakkara temple within Kochi City, believed to be the ancient capital of King Mahabali. The temple festival also marks the start of Onam.
The festival is celebrated in memory of the mythical King Mahabali and his reign, during which perfect harmony and prosperity prevailed. King Mahabali's popularity was at its height and led to the envy of the gods. This golden age ended when Vamana, the dwarf incarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu, expelled him from his throne to the netherworld. On account of his virtue, Mahabali was allowed to visit his subjects once a year, during Onam. Though the myth behind Onam is a Hindu tradition, the festival is fervently celebrated by Christians, Muslims and others. There are special Masses for Onam day in churches and get-togethers among Muslim families.
Onam is considered the biggest shopping festival in urban areas, particularly Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram, and Kozhikode. Most of the shops give huge discounts and special promotions happen for white goods as well as electronic items, making an ideal time for shopping. Dress and fabrics receive special attention during this season. Onam's Eve, Uthradom, is the biggest day for shopping, as it's the final day for Onam shopping, and is nicknamed Uthradom Pachil (Uthradom Rush).
Onam day (Thiruvonam) is a silent day, with most of the festivities limited to homes. In major metros, Onam Special Sadhya (Onam buffets) are arranged in many hotels. Onam feast is the largest feast in Kerala and a minimum 25 to 30 curries and 4 to 5 desserts are served. Normally Onam is a purely vegetarian festival and people of all religions eat vegetarian food on Thiruvonam day, considering its traditional Hindu origin. However, in Malabar side, its compulsory to have non-vegetarian food alongside Onam Sadhya. Onam evening is marked with village games and cultural programs, mainly limited to rural areas. Thiruvananthapuram city has the biggest official celebrations with 10 days and nights of dance, music and events along with heavy illumination and fireworks. Official celebrations have been extended to Kochi and Kozhikode, though not of the scale as in Thiruvananthapuram. However, many private functions and events mark these Onam Days.


==== Vishu ====
The second most important festival in Kerala is Vishu. Vishu falls on Malayalam month of Medam 1st (normally April 14, 15 or 16). It's considered the Astronomic New Year, as it's the day when the Sun enters the Tropic of Cancer. It is considered to be the most auspicious day to start anything new. Though it has less glitz than Onam has, Vishu is important in Kerala, more famous for its Vishu Sadhya (Vishu feast), Kainettam (First Gift by elders to young at the start of the new year) and, of course, shopping.


==== Christmas ====
Christmas is one of the biggest festivals in Kerala. Today Christmas has become a more secular than religious festival. The days from 23 Dec to 2 Jan are considered the most festive days in a year, with terrific shopping, parties, parades and festivities. Parades on Christmas eves in major churches are worth watching and special masses in churches as well as Christmas feasts are memorable. Today most large hotels in the state offer Gala X'mas buffet feasts, good opportunities to taste Kerala Nasarani (Christian) food specialties.


=== New Year's Eve ===
New Year's Eve on 31 Dec is a major festival in many Kerala cities. The famous Cochin Carnival and Lighting of Papanai (a tradition inherited from the Portuguese). At Kochi, a huge effigy of a Santa-like figure called Papanai is lit at the stroke of midnight, believed to bid adieu to the past year and light to welcome the new year. This is followed by an all-night gala party with dance and music. These festivities happen in Fort Cochin. Today many clubs and hotels offer a New Year's Eve bash, also a good way to celebrate. Kovalam Beach in Thiruvananthapuram hosts one of the largest beach parties in India to welcome New Year. Beware of intoxicated locals at the party. DJ dance parties are common in Kozhikode, Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram.


==== Muslim festivals ====
Muslim festivals like Eid Al Fithur (popularly known in Kerala as Cheriya Perunal) and Eid Al Adha (Valiya Perunal) are also celebrated. There are public holidays on these days and special Id prayers are held in large grounds in morning, followed by a public festival. The celebration is statewide. Sample the special Kerala Biriyani and other unique food (mostly chicken and mutton-based). Also, Id days are known for shopping in these regions, particularly dress and sweets. On Ramadan, special evening bazaars are common in many cities and famous for the unique snacks taken to break fast. Public drinking and consuming food openly during Ramadan season, for Muslims, is frowned upon. Try Ramadan special sweets and snacks during fast-breaking time in Fort Cochin as well as Chala Bazaar in Thiruvananthapuram.


==== Temple festivals ====
Most temples have annual temple festivals starting from the end of November to mid-May, which varies according to each temple's annual calendar. Most of the temple festivals are celebrated as part of temple's anniversary or presiding deity's birthday or other major event associated with the temple. Kerala's temple festivals have regular processions of decorated elephants, temple orchestra and other festivities. Most temples have 9 days of festivals and normally the 8th night is celebrated with fireworks and special orchestration of the temple orchestra and a parade of usually 3 to 9 decorated elephants.
Revathy Pattathanam is a famous festival in Kozhikode as part of Zamorin heritage. The Calicut Grandhavari (Kozhikode Chronicles) state that the Zamorin Raja, when he was the Naduvazhi (chieftain) of Ernad earlier, confiscated the Tali Siva temple and evicted sixty Saivite Brahmin trustees. Some of the trustees who resisted were executed. Tradition has it that Revathi Pattathanam, a competition for scholars, came to be organized in the 14th century as a Prayaschitta for this Brahmanahatya (murder of Brahmins, described as one of the five great sins in Dharmashastras). Following the takeover of the temple, the royal family came to the verge of extinction due to the absence of progeny. This was interpreted as the consequence of the Brahmin curse. To remove this curse, the Shaiva saint Kolkunnattu Savankal, a contemporary of poet Raghavananda towards the end of the thirteenth century, advised the Zamorin to institute the competition annually on the latter's birth asterism of Revati. The competition was conducted annually and gifts were distributed to winners in four fields of knowledge- Tarka, Vyakarana, Mimamsa and Vedanta. More subjects were later added. Pisharikavu kaliyattam festival is also conducted in Koyilandi in Kozhikode District.
The most famous temple festival is Thrissur Pooram in Thrissur happening between the last week of April and mid-May. Thrissur Pooram is called the Festivals of Festivals, marking the biggest and most gala temple festival. It is actually a competition of festivities between two temples and parades of 30 to 50 decorated elephants along with huge temple orchestration by 150 to 200 musicians, a visual and auditory extravaganza. Apart from that, heavy temple decors and special lighting are erected across the city and the most famous part is its heavy fireworks is normally considered one of the world's longest fireworks. The fireworks display is also a competition between two temples and lasts 4 to 5 hours, till early morning. The most interesting fact, none of the fireworks are made using help of any computer technology or other electronic gadgets and all are still fired using the traditional means of lighting by hand. A word of caution: the festival is graced by more than 300,000 people from across the state, leading to extreme crowding. Prior booking in hotels as well as on terrace tops is necessary to view the amazing fireworks and parade.
Other festivals include Navarathiri during Sept-Oct and the semiannual Sree Padmanabha's Arattu. Both are celebrated in Thiruvananthapuram and its focal point is Sree Padmanabhaswamy temple. Navarathiri is considered a major festival across India and in Kerala it is related to worship of the Goddess Saraswathi (Goddess of Learning and Knowledge). In Thiruvananthapuram, Navarathiri season is marked with the Parade of Kerala Police from the city to nearby Sree Padmanabhapuram Palace in Nagerkovil district of Tamil Nadu to bring the royal idols of the Goddess (Goddess Durga is the family god of Travancore Royal family and these are still the continuation of royal tradition as practiced in Travancore Kingdom). With the Parade of Armed Police, Mounted Police Battalions, Palace Guards, Members of Royal Family, the idols are brought to Thiruvanathapuram city and placed in Ramanar Palace near Sree Padmanabha temple for the nine nights. The nine nights are then marked with special musical programs, particularly the famous classical music festival.


==== The Sree Padmanbha's Arattu ====
The Sree Padmanbha's Arattu is again a semiannual royal procession of Lord Sree Padmanabha, the presiding deity of the temple. As Lord Sree Padmanabha was the national deity of the Travancore kingdom who adored the title of Emperor of the Erstwhile Kingdom, the procession is considered one of the last legacies of royal heritage, with Kerala Police, Indian Army, Air Force making its obligation to the Lord. This was part of the British tradition, when Royal Indian Army, Royal Air Force and Royal Navy saluted the lord with a 21-gun salute, which continues today. The procession is considered the biggest in the city with the Maharaja of Travancore leading the procession with a golden sword followed by Palace Guards, Kerala Armed police, Sree Padmanabha's Mounted Guards and Royal Elephants, parading the idols of lords through the city, to the nearby seashore at Shanumugham Beach for a bath. Arattu is a public holiday in Thiruvananthapuram and during the bath at the seashore in Shangumugham beach, no aircraft are allowed to fly over as the Thiruvananthapuram Airport is nearby, as a respect to the lord. This is held during Nov-Dec time and agaom during Mar-Apr time. Also, once every 12 years, the biggest festival at Sree Padmanabhaswamy temple happens, which marks lighting of 100,000 oil lamps, a world record, called Lakshamdeepam.


=== Adventure sports ===
Kerala's many waterways allow catamaran-sailing (a small often wooden vessel with twin hulls joined together), canoeing, kayaking, scuba diving, snorkeling, wind-surfing, and para-sailing.
For less wet sports, Kerala offers mountain biking, mountain hiking, rock and tree climbing, and paragliding, in the hill and mountain regions.
There is also Oxen Racing. A racer drives two oxen tied to wooden boards and makes 5 circles around the paddy field. This is a popular village sport, done before sowing season, to make soil easier to plough, while providing entertainment. Traditionally tourists are not encouraged to participate in this sport, as it requires skill and expertise, though many tour companies provide this option for adventurous guests.
Kozhikode is famous for kayaking in rivers and near waterfalls. The annual international kayaking festival is conducted at Kodenchery.


=== Sports ===

Sport options in Kerala include football, cricket, volleyball, and athletics. Malayalees are well known for their passion for volleyball and athletics. The majority of great Indian volleyball players and famous athletes, of which many are Olympians, are from Kerala. To participate in a volleyball game, "bring your A game" as the locals excel!
Golfing is good but limited. Traditionally golf was considered a game for the rich in Kerala, hence one can only find good golf-courses in Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi. The Trivandrum Golf Course is the oldest golf-course in the Commonwealth and a good place to play. The Bolgatty Palace Hotel in Cochin has a private golf-course for its guests, which was the traditional golf-course once used by British residents and nobles of Royal English residency of Cochin. Cochin Airport has a state-of-the-art 18-hole golf course and it is good place to play, as well as learn, golf. Munnar's scenic golf course is called High-Range Golf Club. There are some small golf clubs in Iddukki and Kottayam districts, which are mainly limited to their members, though tourists may be allowed to play at slightly higher fees.
Cricket is a craze among the younger generations. They play in large, open spaces and fields. Regular cricket tournaments are held in Kerala.
Indoor stadiums are common in most of the large metros and district headquarters. Many indoor games are played at clubs and tourist recreation centres. Popular indoor games include table tennis, badminton and cards. Most hotels have large swimming pools. There is also the Kerala Water sports complex in Thiruvananthapuram and the Indoor Sports Centre in Kochi, that provide Olympic-sized pools for various water games.


=== Safaris ===
Elephant safaris can be fantastic and memorable. They are common in Thenmala Eco-tourist Village and at Kodanadu Elephant Training centre near Kochi, as well as in Periyar Tiger reserve area.
Jungle safari. Kerala has many natural rain forests, with much unique flora and fauna. Many forests are protected and entry requires permission from the Forest Office. Guards from the Forest Office may be required to accompany you due to presence of wild animals and to liaise with local tribespeople in some forests such as the Periyar Tiger Reserve, Malayatoor Forest Division, Silent Valley Rain forest in the Nilgiri Hills of Palakkad district, Wayanad forest division and Nilambur Teak forests. Do not offer anything to local tribespeople or disturb them in any way. Entering forests that require permission without permission is punishable with charges of trespassing. Hunting and environmental disturbances are also an offence. Kerala tourism, in association with the Forest Office have organised some deep-jungle safaris. Jungle lodges are available in outer areas of some of the forests. Check with KTDC or DTPC for more details.


== Buy ==


=== Money ===
In Kerala, credit and debit cards are accepted in some places. Banks, money exchange facilities and ATMs are widespread. Traveller's cheques are accepted in almost all banks. Rural areas traditionally have a cash-based society. The cash limit that can be drawn per day is ₹10,000 when drawn from ATMs. A surcharge of ₹50 is charged for transactions beyond the first ten transactions in a month. Foreign currency can be converted into Indian rupees (₹) at any authorised money changers or nationalised banks up to ₹50,000 in value per transaction and any amount above this requires a bank account and Indian PAN Card. Foreign currencies are not accepted anywhere in Kerala, except in airports and authorised money exchange centers (available in all cities).


=== Banking ===
The largest Kerala bank is Federal Bank with its headquarters in Aluva, Kochi, with branches across the state. Major Kerala banks include, State Bank of Travancore, South Indian Bank, Catholic Syrian Bank, and Dhanalakshmi bank, apart from almost all national bank brands. International banks such as HSBC, Standard Chartered and Citibank mainly operate in Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram.


=== Tipping ===
Service charges are common in hotels and restaurants which will be normally included in the bill (the standard is 10%, which varies depending upon the status and rankings, but not beyond 15%). Additionally, tipping is common everywhere and it's a social norm to tip in hotels and restaurants, normally ₹10-20. In larger five-star hotels or similar large restaurants, the tipping norm is normally 10% or 12% of the bill value. No tip is given for auto or taxi drivers, though over-night taxi drivers have to be paid bata (official tip) which shall be charged separately in the taxi bill.


=== Costs ===
Kerala is generally more expensive than the rest of India.
Budget tourists normally require ₹1,000 per day for a decent stay including food. A day may include patronage of ordinary restaurants or road-side hawkers (called Thattukadas) for their food which costs less than ₹40. Mid-range tourists can expect daily expenses of ₹1,400-₹2,000 per day with a stay in moderate hotel and for food in standard restaurants. To luxuriate, Kerala normally costs beyond ₹4,000.


=== Shopping ===
Shopping is a national hobby in Kerala, with vast options in all metropolitan areas.
The best time to shop is during the Onam or Christmas seasons, when there are deep discounts. The best shopping during Onam are white goods and electronics, whereas apparel and jewellery are discounted more during Christmas. Many items are discounted in these seasons.
Most of the leading foreign brands and products are available (from apparel to automobiles) across Kerala. Consider the following for made in Kerala items.


=== Souvenirs ===

A wide range of coconut shell products can be found in Alappuzha, most of them hand-made.
While visiting Aranmula, a small town in Pathanamthitta, the famous Aranmula Mirror is sold - a mirror made of metal instead of glass, using a metallurgic formula which is a closely guarded secret. It is an expensive, but unique souvenir.
A typical emporium sells handicrafts, such as Kerala's famous wooden crafts, brass models of cultural icons like vallam (snake boats), urus (sailboats), elephants in temple-festival style, and traditional jewelry boxes.
Showcase pieces like Nettipattam (the Caparison used for elephants), molded of plastic and adorned with decorations like peacock quill, are popular. The God's Own Craft, an organization based in Kochi, has popularised the sale of these plastic pieces, helping visitors bring them home, while retaining the traditional look and charm.
Coir wall hangings with beautiful pictures and fans made out of Lemongrass that disperses a natural scent while fanning.


=== Fabric ===
Kerala's traditional handloom cloth, Mundu and Neriyathu, can be purchased directly from weavers mainly in Chendamangalam, near Kochi, and Balaramapuram, near Thiruvananthapuram.
Large stores in the cities sell worked sarees, Churidars, dress materials, salwar suits, and Indian men's wear like Kurtha-Pyjama.


=== Oils and spices ===
Kerala is well known for spices. Cardamom, pepper, cloves, turmeric, saffron and many others are sold in Kerala's bazaars. Some of the recommended spice markets are Broadway in Kochi and Chalai in Trivandrum. At Wayanad, Idukki, Pathanamtitta, Kottayam and Kozhikode there are premium spices from authorised spice centres. These places are famous for value-added spice products like curry masala powders, ready-to-use spice powders, spice essences, extracts, spiced teas and coffee. Rare spice oils and concentrates used as bases for perfume and scents can also be found.
Many outlets sell unique natural cosmetic powders like mango, orange and papaya peel powder and turmeric powder. These and other spices, herbal powders and natural extracts are good for making face and body cleansing powders and soaps.
Lemongrass oil has a rare scent. It can also be used on the skin to discourage mosquitoes. There are more than a dozen oils in Kerala, famous for maintaining a healthy skin glow and reducing blemishes and acne.
Coconut oil reduces hair loss, nurtures hair growth, and promotes healthy, glowing skin. Keralites use coconut as a high-temperature cooking oil and scrapped powder and coconut milk is used in many local cooking styles. Roasted oil and virgin coconut oil reduce cholesterol and promote good health. It is also used by expecting mothers for keeping their baby healthy.


=== Murals and paintings ===
Kerala is home to many famous national and international painters. There are the celebrated Kerala murals and oil paintings of legendary Raja Ravi Varma and many others. There are murals and paintings of many sizes, styles, and prices, which are comparatively lower in Kerala.


== Eat ==
Kerala cuisine differs from other Indian cuisines. For example, there are the dominance of rice as a staple food and the popularity of non-vegetarian dishes. Kerala is known for its incredibly long-standing, and liberal consumption of meat, fish and alcohol, unlike the rest of India.
In stark contrast to other Indian states, beef is commonly eaten in Kerala by members of all religions. Beef, fish and other types of meat have been regularly consumed in Kerala since at least the Chera Dynasty in 500 BCE. Seafood gets a lion's share in typical Kerala's cuisine and lavish use of coconut (in form of coconut oil, coconut milk, powder or paste) gives a distinct taste. Food in Kerala tends to include a variety of spices and most of them are fiery. Kerala also offers famous vegetarian cuisines and normally only vegetarian foods are taken during festival days, particularly Onam.
Kerala's cuisine is divided into four basic regional styles, according to ingredient availability and historical influence: Malabar, Central Travancore, Southern Travancore, and Central Kerala. Although all four styles can be found throughout the state, the food will be most authentic within each given region.


=== Sadhya ===

A favourite is Kerala's traditional buffet, the sadhya. It is served especially during festive occasions and normally presented upon a plaintain leaf. It generally has up to 24 items and is accompanied by various desserts and savories.
A typical sadhya consists of piping hot parboiled rice with popular Kerala vegetarian dishes like olan (a dish of pumpkin), avial (an assorted mix of all vegetables), injipulee (a ginger and tamarind flavouring), kaalan (made of yam and yogurt), thoran (pan-fried vegetables sprinkled with grated coconut), kichiadi (roasted cucumber in yogurt), pachadi (a sweet dish made from pineapple or grapes mixed with sour yogurt), and kottukari (a mixture of few vegetables like raw bananas or pumpkin or potatoes, pan fried mixed with a spicy tomato puree curry base). In some sadhyas, options like potato stew and masala curry are served. The sambar (a watery all-vegetable curry) and parippu (lentils, either mashed or in curry form) along with ghee are served as the main appetiser. Normally 2 to 3 spicy pickles called achar are served.
Other assortments include pappadam (fried lentil-flour paper-thin bread), along with banana chips and jaggery sweet, served as main appetisers. Towards the end of sadhya, rasam (similar to mulligatawny soup made out of pepper and tomato water is served, which is facilitates digestion) and mooru or sambharam (spiced buttermilk) are served. Bananas are also taken as a final note to end the elaborate sadhya's main course. The desserts includes payasam (a sweet porridge-like, made of jaggery or sugar along with rice, cereals, fruits depending on the type of payasam) as well as boli, a sweet flour bread, which looks similar to an omelet, along with a banana and sometimes unniappam (sweet fried rice flour dumpling).
Normally sadyas are served at lunch and normally are purely vegetarian. Onasadhya (served on the Onam day) is the most famous, due to having more than 30 curries and an elaborate range of special payasams. Many leading hotels and restaurants now serve smaller versions of sadhya as part of a regular lunch offering. In Malabar, sometimes, fried-fish or chicken curry constitute part of the sadhya, as the  Malabar sadhya has no vegetarian tradition.


==== Thalis/fixed-price meals ====
Most hotels offer a smaller version of sadhya called thali (fixed or unlimited serving) as part of regular lunch. A thali normally has around 8-10 curries along with 2 pickles and pappadams and a payasam. Small hotels and regular lunch homes offer a small, popular option called meals. A typical lunch meal consists of 3 to 4 curries and 1 pickle and pappadam. Fish curry or fried fish are part of fish-meals.


=== Seafood ===
Seafood is available throughout Kerala. In regions bordering the backwaters and lakes, traditional cuisine includes fresh-water fish such as karimeen (black pearlspot), prawns, shrimps, kanava (squid) and more. In most of Kerala, a variety of sea fishes are popular and consumed regularly in afternoon lunch. Also popular is fiery hot fish curry served with 'kappa' (tapioca) or rice. Steamed and mashed tapioca flavoured with turmeric served along with spicy fish curry or mashed chilly gravy is a favorite among Malayalees, particularly those in rural areas.


=== Breakfast ===

Kerala is famed for its elaborate breakfasts. It has been adjourned as one of the best breakfasts in the world, partly due to its high nutritional value and low oil content. Unlike elsewhere in India, few non-vegetarian items are available on Kerala breakfast menus. Some of the popular breakfast items are:

Dosas (crispy fried ricebread), flavoured with butter, ghee, or masala or plain
Idiyappam (string hoppers, also known as noolputtu and nool-appam), taken with spicy egg curry or tomato curry
Idli (steamed rice pancake) a soft fluffy cake taken alone with chutney (spicy chilly/coconut paste) and sambar
Kadala, a curry of black garbanzo beans chana and bananas
Paal-Appam, a circular, fluffy, crisp-edged pancake made of rice flour, sometimes fermented with toddy or wine or yeast, is taken with chicken stew (mild-spiced coconut-milk-based gravy) egg curry or vegetable kurma (a mixed vegetable curry in coconut-milk gravy).
Pidiyan (dumplings made of rice and jaggery)
Puttu (made of rice powder and grated coconut, steamed in a metal or bamboo holder), taken along with kadala. Varieties of puttu made with carrot, raggi, and with fillings of chicken, mutton, and prawn, are available in some places.
Malabar parotta, a type of flatbread made by repeatedly flipping the dough against a flat and smooth surface until thin, then layering it onto itself, before frying in ghee. Malaysia's roti canai and Singapore's roti prata was derived from this.


=== Dinner ===
Dinner traditionally resembles lunch in Kerala, though instead of rice, congee or kanzhi (rice porridge) is served along with spicy raw chillies and roasted pappadams. Today, dinner resembles the North Indian-style dinner, with chappathis and parathas dominating the main course along with vegetable or non-vegetable curries.


=== Breads & rice ===

Kerala has no indigenous wheat breads in its traditional recipes, though most of the North Indian breads like naans and parathas are now popular. There are many rice-flour-based breads which are rarely seen outside Kerala.

Rice breads - palappams (milk mixed in normal appam batter) and kallappams (palm toddy mixed in normal appam batter)
Rice flour breads - pathiris (a fried rice flour bread), ghee pathiri (pathiri baked in ghee), poricha pathiri (fried, rather than baked, pathiri) and stuffed pathiris (fillings include vegetables, fish or chicken)
Malabar paratha (porotta) - a milled wheat woven fried (or toasted) bread originated from Malabar, popular throughout Kerala
Rice - Kerala's favourite rice is matta (a nutritious indigenous variety of rice grown in Palakkad district of Kerala). Normal boiled rice, served piping hot is a regular staple for lunch and dinner. Other popular options are ghee rice, fried rice, saffron rice, turmeric rice and biryani rice.


=== Sweets ===

Due to the lesser influence of Arab and Central Asian food on Kerala, the use of sweets is less widespread than in North India. Kerala has no indigenous cold desserts, but hot and warm desserts are popular. The most popular is undoubtedly the payasam: a preparation of milk, coconut extract, sugar, cashews and dry grapes. There are more than 18 varieties of payasam, all having same base constituents and differ from others due to the main ingredient. Popular variants include paal payasam (made with rice grains), Ada payasam (with beaten rice flakes), Paripu payasam (made from lentils), pazham pradhamam (made from banana), gothambu payasam (made from wheat grain) or semiya (made with vermicelli).
Other popular indigenous sweets are:

Unniappam, a fluffy deep-fried rice-bread mixed with ripe bananas similar to the Danish Æbleskiver.
Pazham-pori, plantain slices covered with a fried crust made of sweetened flour
Kozhukkatta, rice dumplings stuffed with a sweet mixture of molasses and coconut
Savories are popular in Kerala, with fried banana chips preferred. Jack-fruit chips, chips made of rice flour in forms such as achappam, kozhalappam, paka-vada, and hard balls made of rice flour with jaggery such as avilose unda are popular.


=== Ethnic food ===
Several restaurants sport signboards Nadan Hotel which is Malayalam for traditional food. This indicates the ancient Keralite style of eating on plantain leaves. Sometimes the spices are ground in the old way instead of using commercially available spice mixes. On the whole, the main difference is the presence of a village cook in place of an urban chef.


=== Cost of food ===
Food prices vary greatly, but Indian Coffee House outlets charge as followsː

Vegetarian meals ₹40
Nonvegetarian meals ₹70
Ghee rice, single ₹37
Chicken curry ₹65
Fish curry ₹47
Fish fry ₹110
Egg masala ₹35
Beef biriyani ₹110
Chicken biriyani, single ₹95
Mutton biriyani, single ₹125


== Drink ==
Water. Tap water is usually unsafe to drink. Mineral water is available at almost all shops and is the safest option.

Tender coconut water, (karikku) is available in even the smallest towns. It is sweet and creamy and contains an ice-cream like cream which can be drunk, housed in a delicious pulp that can be eaten. It's healthy, too.
Coffee (kapi) and tea (chaya): unlike elsewhere in South India, in Kerala tea is more popular than coffee. Stalls selling tea are common. The famous tea of Kerala is the Kannan Devan brand. In Kerala there are Milma (a milk brand) booths selling tea with milk and snacks. Coffee is more popular in urban areas. Popular national brands like Cafe Coffee Day and many local cafes offer various flavours of coffee with western/oriental snacks. Kerala's traditional cafe is Indian Coffee House, which are old-fashioned pre-1970s-style coffee shops offering Kerala coffee along with Kerala foods. From the new generation of cafe, comes Kerala's widespread Coffee Beanz. They offer various innovative coffee flavours and traditional Kerala snacks along with lite burgers.
Juices and shakes, Kerala, being a tropical state, offers many tropical juices. Almost everywhere one can find juice stalls selling mango, orange, pineapple, lemon, watermelon and other juices. Milk shakes mixed with ice-cream are popular and the best way to beat the Kerala summer heat. Sharja shake and chikoos are popular milkshakes mixed with various fruits and fruit-flavoured ice-creams.
Alcohol, Kerala tops in per capita alcohol consumption in India, despite the high rate of government taxation. There is a bar in most hotels serving anything from 'kallu' (Kerala traditional palm toddy) to Scotch whisky. Alcohol consumption in public is frowned upon, and the bars, except in expensive hotels, tend to be seedy. Bars in urban areas nowadays are more upscale and hence more expensive or carry additional service charges. For budget travellers who wish to have liquors in private, most of the liquor brands along with beer can be bought from Government-run Kerala State Beverage Corporations Limited (popularly known as Beverage Shop or Bevco) stores and drunk in private. However, there is usually a long queue in front of these stores. Additionally, they are closed on the 1st of every month. Kerala has many posh bars and pubs in which to drink. Several restaurants in cities like Kozhikode, Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram, Kottayam and Kollam serve alcohol along with food. Cocktails are popular.
Locally made palm toddy, called kallu, is tempting, but some people become sick due to bad brews. If you do try it, stick to the license-made brew, and not local moonshine. However, on the Alappuzha-Changaserry route, there are good toddy shops which offer authorised toddy in addition to tasty, unique Kerala specialties. Even if you don't try toddy, the food from these toddy shops is an excellent way to experience Kerala's distinctive cuisine.


== Sleep ==
With tourism being an important source for the state's coffers, a variety of accommodation is available for various tastes and budgets. Almost all major cities have hotels ranging from tourist lodges to 5-star hotels and theme resorts. There are also youth hostels, home-stays, travel dormitories and small lodges catering to smaller budgets.
For a smoother, more peaceful visit, stay in beach properties as the rest of Kerala suffers from traffic issues. Traffic jams are a daily phenomenon in most of Kerala. Since the railway line isolates the beach side from the rest of the downtown areas, the beach areas are more peaceful. On the other hand, the hill districts of Palakkad, Wayanad, Idukki and Pathanamthitta rarely experience traffic snarls.


=== Homestays ===
Kerala was one of the first states in India to pioneer the concept of homestays and make it a successful industry. Under the homestay concept, you stay with a family who can show you around and help you experience Kerala. Your accommodation and food come at a nominal cost. The host family probably speaks English. All the people offering homestays are vetted by the government and will have to register themselves as such.
Most home-stays are in the Fort Cochin area, where traditional large colonial bungalows and Jewish houses have been converted into homestays. Alappuzha and Kottayam have many large homestays catering to both rich and budget tourists. Kollam also has its own share of home-stays which are mostly traditional Portuguese bungalows in addition to those owned by the town's industrialists. There are many small-scale backpacker-oriented homestays in Kannur and other Malabar towns.
The government has strict guidelines for homestays, so they are generally safe and well-maintained. These homestays range between ₹300 and ₹3,500 per night, depending upon the property and its profile.


=== Budget ===
₹322.50 and ₹700 are magic numbers when looking for budget non-AC and AC rooms respectively. Expect basic amenities: a bed, a TV and an attached bathroom. Most of the budget hotels call themselves tourist lodges, tourist homes or, sometimes, hotels. They are rarely star-rated. Most hotels near railway stations in cities are cheap. Kerala has many Brahmin's tourist homes with rooms for families and couples. If available, choose this option as they are safe and quiet. Cheap, extended-stay options with an attached kitchenette, are rare in Kerala.


=== Mid-range ===
Expect to pay above ₹700 (~US$14) for a non-air-conditioned room or more than ₹1,200 (~US$26) for one with air-conditioning. This category includes many 3-star hotels. Expect spacious rooms, English-proficient concierges, and airport or railway station pick-up and drop-off.
Themed resorts also may also fall in this category. Expect ₹3,000 and above. It is possible to rent an entire cottage in an idyllic location. These cottages are equipped with kitchens.


=== Splurge ===
Almost all 3-star and above hotels and resorts are in this category. Star-rated hotels in India are not cheap. Most of them throw in a complimentary guided or packaged tour. Most five-star hotels provide an attached kitchenette. If you tire of Indian food, this would be a good option. Most of these hotels offer only air-conditioned rooms. Average costs can be ₹5,000 and above for a night. These are generally safe and provide a sound holiday.


=== Extended stay ===
If planning to stay more than 2 weeks, monthly stay options are better than hotels. Housing in Kerala is not expensive, though it may be on the higher side in major metros. But elsewhere, housing is cheaper, even by Indian standards.
Serviced apartments are common in Kochi, Kottayam, Alappuzha, Thrissur, Kollam, Kozhikode, and Thiruvananthapuram. There are popular service apartments, which offer hotel-like facilities for an extended stay, in Kochi city. Most of these apartments are well furnished with kitchenette facilities. Keep in mind more amenities usually mean higher costs.
For budget tourists, lodges are the best option. In most of the places, lodges or tourist homes offer single or double rooms on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis. Most of them have standard facilities, including attached toilets. Cheaper ones may not have TVs or personal landlines in each room. There are also men's and ladies' hostels, where single travellers can stay on a monthly basis.


== Stay safe ==
Kerala is considered a safe region of India, with functional police and state institutions. However, one must not do without caution.


=== Crime ===
Kerala has its share of criminals. Pickpockets frequent crowded areas like buses, festival grounds and city shopping areas. Don't trust hotel cleaning staff with your costly belongings. Also, women are advised not to walk around in tight or revealing clothing. Do not wander late at night, especially alone.
In trains and buses, it is absolutely vital not to eat or drink anything offered by a fellow traveller, due to risks of sedation and robbery. A smile and a soft "No, thank you" will suffice to avoid offending the genuine traveller. Be firm, yet polite. This especially holds true for interactions with a lone or a couple of fellow passengers. However, interactions with families are considered safer.


=== Hartals ===
The most likely problems are strikes, protest processions and hartals (which are called "voluntary closure of activities" as protests, but are enforced on everyone by the organisers) which are common in Kerala, considering its highly politicised and socialist leanings. Hartals or road blockades due to protests may strand tourists in airports or railway stations. They can be avoided because all political parties announce the date and details of major protests far in advance in leading dailies. Regularly follow leading English dailies, speak to your hotel reception desk staff/restaurant staff (smaller towns sometimes have "hartals" called with a day's notice) and keep buffer days for all travel.
On hartal days, normally all forms of transport keep off roads from morning till evening. So be prepared to walk to your hotel or wait in the airport or railway station till evening. Kerala Police normally operate free buses under police convoy to transport tourists and urgent passengers to important areas in major towns and cities; these can be used as a last resort.


=== "Moral Police" ===
Many people in Kerala complained of "Moral Policing" or vigilante groups that attack unmarried couples for making out in public. These vigilante groups never target foreigners, but if you look like an Indian, it is advisable to restrict your movements to the cities and tourist centres. If you remember these rules of thumb, Kerala will be fine for you.


=== Other issues ===
While boating insist on being offered life jackets. Many boat operators ignore the statutory issuance of life jackets while boating, which could prove risky, as most of the Kerala's water bodies are deep.
Though Kerala has few touts or so-called "guides," a few people from outside the state do encounter this problem at some tourist centres, especially hill stations like Munnar. Avoid them completely, as many nowadays are thieves seeking prey. A firm "no" suffices.


=== Emergency assistance ===


==== Police ====

The Kerala Police force is one of the most efficient police units in India and the least corrupt. Most of the police officials are well versed in English and Malayalam. Most of the cities do have a strong police network and it's easy to find a police station. Normal law and order police force wear khaki uniforms. Traffic Police wear a uniform of a white shirt with khaki pants.
There is a specialised police section for tourist protection: the Tourist Police. This force is stationed at prominent tourist places, beaches, monuments, trekking areas and other tourist attractions. They wear a light blue shirt with khaki pants and have an aid post marked Tourist Police. They can be helpful. The International Tourist Police Station in Mattancherry-Fort, Kochi should be the primary tourist assistance point for any complaints and may also be used for information on any immigration and passport or visa matter.

 Highway police, toll-free:  +91 98 4610 0100 (in event of any distress on any highway). Safeguard Kerala's highways. 


==== Fire and public rescue ====
 Kerala's Fire and Rescue Services, ☏ 101. maintains a network of distress rescue services throughout the state 


==== Medical emergency ====

Kerala hospitals, first aid centres and select primary health-care centres across the state are all equipped for emergency admissions and treatment. Most ambulances have a Red Cross on a white background, but members of the Rapid Medical Action Force (RMAF) have a yellow and green livery ambulance with a Red Cross sign.

For any urgent medical attention or ambulance services, call ☏ 102. Kerala Healthcare Department has unified with ☏ 1298 and ☏ 108 emergency providers. 108 Emergency is an advanced life-saving ambulance even equipped to carry out minor operations operating mainly in urban areas, while 1298 provides comprehensive services across all parts of Kerala.
In event of an accident, use only hospitals marked "'Casualty'" outside, as they have a suitable licence to admit a road-accident case.
In event of any accident on a roadway, call ☏ 100 for police or ☏ 108, as many times common citizens do not come to rescue, especially in large cities, fearing involvement in a police case. The police maintain fast and effective accident identification and recovery service; thus, in the event of any accident, even a distress call from your mobile can help them to identify your position and assist in expediting medical attention.


== Stay healthy ==
Tap water is generally safe for drinking, though tourists are advised to buy bottled water for drinking or boil the tap water. As a tropical country, Kerala is hot and humid so stay hydrated.
Most toilets do not have toilet paper, so always carry your own. A hose delivers water instead (somewhat like, but not equivalent to, the Japanese bidet toilets).
Malaria, dengue fever, cholera and viral fever are endemic to the region. Moonsoon time is considered one of the major epidemic seasons, due to the wet atmosphere, which provides breeding grounds for water-borne viruses. Mosquito repellents should be applied regularly, or use of mosquito coils or mosquito repellent mats in your room and mosquito nets over beds. Various local spice extracts and oils repel mosquitoes.
While touring during summer days, always wear a cap or have an umbrella to avoid the harshness of the tropical sun, and wear only cotton. Drinking sharbath, a popular road-side stall drink made of carbonated lemon juice mixed with sugar syrup with a little salt, can stave off dehydration.


=== Medical care ===
The standard of medical care in Kerala is excellent and this is a popular destination for medical tourism and medical research. Many hospitals in Kerala are of international standards. Government-run clinics and hospitals are free for all but can be crowded and not the best option for visitors. Private hospitals offer good treatment at comparatively low prices.
For minor ailments, almost any private hospital or clinic suffices. Most of the private-care hospitals are well equipped and have good physicians and specialists. Out-patients are required to have an appointment to avoid large queues and most of them have pharmacies nearby.
Large, super-specialty hospitals are available in major metro cities. These are major research centres, and are expensive by Indian standards. Most of the hospitals in large towns and metros do accept foreign medical insurance cards, mainly issued in the U.S., Europe and Middle East, apart from almost all national medical insurance covers, which need to be presented at hospital reception.
Kerala also has prestigious, large Ayurvedic hospitals and super-specialty Ayurvedic research centres, some even equipped to conduct surgeries and cancer treatments. Generally, Ayurvedic healthcare centres are more expensive than the "allopathic" ones. However, always prefer hospitals that provide evidence-based treatment for serious illness.


=== Stray-dog menace ===
Tourists should avoid walking in lonely streets of Kerala as stray dog menace has increased lately. One woman was killed in 2016 when she was attacked by a pack of dogs. Many dogs can be seen wandering in a violent pack formation during the night.


== Respect ==


=== Places of worship ===
In Kerala, the religions coexist in harmony. This is achieved by respecting each religion's customs and rituals. A visit to their shrines reveals the breadth of their cultural influence.


==== Hindu temples ====
Some Hindu temples in Kerala do not admit non-Hindus inside, in which case a sign board to that effect is prominently displayed outside the temple premises. The only exceptions are the Muthappan Temples, which do not have these restrictions. It is best to ask someone at the temple if unsure. Photography inside the temple is forbidden. The Sabarimala temple did not allow women aged between 10 and 50 and even though this rule was abolished by India's Supreme Court, it is still considered very taboo and women in this category should not enter under any circumstance.
Because tidiness and personal hygiene are important, a bath in the morning is required for those entering a temple.
For male visitors at many places inside a temple, the dress code is traditional mundu without a shirt - the no-shirt rule will be enforced even if the mundu rule is not. Watch what others are doing and follow. Remove your footwear outside the temple. Usually there are no locker facilities, so cheap footwear is best.
Women should wear a long dress, preferably not shirts and trousers, and are forbidden from entering temples for 7 days after the start of their menstrual period.
There are exceptions to some of these rules, though, so when in doubt, check.


==== Mosques ====
Some mosques do not allow women inside. For those that do, women must dress modestly by wearing a dress that covers their entire torso, legs and arms, and cover their head with a shawl or scarf. No photography or any electronic equipment is allowed inside, and all who enter must remove their shoes.


==== Churches ====
The churches in Kerala admit non-Christians inside. Men usually sit to the left of the aisle and women to the right. Some of the more traditional churches don't even have pews; you'll have to stand. Ladies do cover their head with a shawl or scarf during the mass.


==== Synagogues ====
The synagogue at Kochi is not open to non-Jews on Saturdays. Visitors need to dress with modesty. Sleeveless tops and short trousers are not permitted.


==== Jain temples ====
Many Jain temples no longer function, though the Kochi and Kozhikode temples remain active. When visiting an active Jain temple, modest dress is required, including a head covering and something to cover the nose and mouth since Jains believe in utmost non-violence and do not like even to kill a small insect that might be inhaled. Do not take any pictures of Jain monks, as some Jain monks believe in nudity and photographing them is considered offensive.


=== Customs and social etiquette ===
Some customs and social etiquette should be understood to be respectful and respected as a visitor.

Kerala is traditionally a matriarchal society, with ladies given more preferences and priority. They receive priorities in queue, seating in public transport, priority or separate reservations in public transport waiting lists, etc.
Ladies are expected to conform to traditional standards of modesty. For example, ladies smoking and drinking are considered a social taboo (so be discreet if you partake). Ladies should wear shorts that at least cover the knee. They will fit in better if they wear full-length dresses and skirts.
Though Kerala ranks highest in alcohol consumption inside India, including wine or beer, public consumption is frowned upon. Women consuming alcohol are especially frowned upon; it would be unwise for a woman visiting the state to enter a bar, with the exception of lounges and bars in premium hotels in cities such as Kozhikode, Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram.
Nudity in any form is frowned upon for both genders, especially for women. It's OK for men to be bare-chested in public, though it's little appreciated except at the beach or rural areas. In public beaches or rivers, women can wear swim-suits or covering towels around the body, but bikinis are generally frowned upon and only invite trouble. It is safest to confirm with a female hotel receptionist if a private hotel pool will allow bikinis. Though there is no gender segregation at beaches, rivers, ghats or swimming pools, gender segregation is maintained in temple ponds and certain public ghats.
In any public transport like buses, the front rows are reserved for ladies, and men are expected to not sit there, even if the seats are unoccupied.
If you have Kerala sadya (traditional Kerala buffet) in places other than large hotels, you are expected to discard any leftovers (called echil) by folding the leaf upon which you ate into two and putting it where others do. You must not leave it at the serving place and leave.


== Connect ==
Kerala is almost covered by 5G, 4G, 3G and 2G mobile network connectivity. From 2023 onwards, the 5G services began in Kerala, and all major locations are covered by high-speed connectivity. Major hotels offer free Wi-Fi and there are Internet cafes in leading cities. Major places and railway stations also provide free Wi-Fi in association with Google and BSNL.


== Go next ==
Bangalore (Bengaluru) — the garden city, once the sleepy home of pensioners now transformed into a city of pubs and technology companies
Courtallam — famous for its waterfalls and oil therapy, near Kollam
Kanyakumari — a Hindu religious place, lies on the southern tip of the Indian mainland and the Vivekananda rock.
Kodagu (Coorg) — a popular hill-station, known as the Scotland of India. Famous for its exotic coffee plantations, Tibetan settlements, forest safaris and woods party.
Lakshadweep — the pristine coral reef islands, small archipelagos, white sand beaches famous for scuba diving
Madurai — city famous for its Meenakshi Amman Temple, it was among the nominees for the new list of 7 wonders of the world for its architecture.
The Maldives — an island-nation, well connected by flights from Thiruvananthapuram, famous for its water sports and beach tourism
Mysore (Mysuru) — the cultural capital of neighboring Karnataka state, famous for its large palaces and festivals
Sri Lanka — this wonderful island, now recovering from years of civil war, is an easy flight from Kochi.