Manali is a city of about 11,000 people (2023) in Central Himachal Pradesh. A staging point for a number of treks (Beas Kund, Chandrakhani Pass) and sports such as white-water rafting, Manali is also on the road to Ladakh via the valley of Lahaul and Spiti and Rohtang Pass, which is the main attraction near Manali.


== Understand ==
Manali, at the northern end of the Kullu Valley in Himachal Pradesh, is a hill station at a height of 2,050 m (6,398 ft) in the Himalayas, on the Beas River (Vyaas in Hindi) and near its source. It is a popular tourist spot for Indians in summer and a magical, snow-covered place in winter. 


=== Weather ===
The minimum temperature ranges between -15 and -5 °C from October till March. December, January and February are coldest months. For the rest of the year the minimum temperature would be between 15 and 20 °C.


=== Climate ===

The climate in Manali is predominantly cold during winters, and moderately cool during summers. The temperatures range from 4 °C (39 °F) to 26 °C (68 °F) over the year. The average temperature during summer is between 4°C (39°F) and 15°C (59°F), and between −15°C (5°F) and 05°C (41°F) in the winter. Monthly precipitation varies between 31 mm (1.2 in) in November and 217 mm (8.5 in) in July. On average, some 45 mm (1.8 in) of precipitation is received during winter and spring months, increasing to some 115 mm (4.5 in) in summer as the monsoon approaches. The average total annual precipitation is 1,363 mm (53.7 in). Snowfall often takes place between November end and early February. The weather in Manali is not stable.


== Get in ==


=== By bus ===
Manali is about 570 km (350 mi) from Delhi and there are buses connecting the town with Delhi, Shimla, Dharamsala and Leh. For service from Delhi to Manali, tickets and reservations can be made at the Inter State Bus Terminus as well as at the Himachal Tourism office on Safdar Hashmi Marg near Mandi House in New Delhi. Privately owned Volvo buses offer 60% cheaper ticket prices than the government owned Volvo buses. The approximate travel time from Delhi to Manali is 14 hours; from Ambala to Manali is 10 hours; and from Kulu to Manali is 1½ to 3 hours. Volvo buses—which depart at around 5PM and reach at 9-10AM next day—are available from Delhi and is the best option in terms of comfort and value for money to reach Manali but you need to book these in advance. Some hotels will book your Volvo with WiFi connection and personal LED screen along with their hotel package.


=== By private taxi ===
If hiring a private taxi, ensure that the driver has experience driving in hilly regions and does not have the habit of drinking alcohol. Also make sure the driver has done the trip at least once before and knows all roads.  Also make sure that the driver is used to drive for long hours. Many operators turn off air-conditioning during the majority of the hill journey, or demand to be paid extra if asked to. Best to confirm this prior to booking. If you are going to Manali through Chandigarh-Ropar-Kiratpur-Bilaspur-Mandi-Kullu highway, then your driver would need to drive on hilly roads for at least 6 hours. The expected price is somewhere around ₹3000 to ₹4000/day for an Indica hatchback or a bigger Innova car from Delhi. To get the best deals on cabs, look for cabs that came one-way from Manali/Kullu to drop tourists at Delhi. These cabs (usually with HP01K registration plates) offer 60% cheaper fares, as they've been paid fully by the previous customer. Also, you can find them at parking station near Majnu ka tilla/ New Aruna Nagar. 


=== By train ===
The nearest Broad Gauge Rail Head is Chandigarh (310 km). Ambala Cantonment en route Chandigarh is on the Delhi - Amritsar and Delhi - Jammu main lines and is well-served by rail, but you will need to travel to Ambala to get a bus for the 10 hour ride to Manali. Jogindernagar and Kalka are other, less preferable, rail heads for Manali.
The nearest Broad gauge station is Kiratpur Sahib in Punjab near the city of Nangal. It lies in Ropar district of Punjab. The station lies on the Ambala Cantt - Una route of Indian Railways. From here you can easily get buses for Manali.


=== By plane ===
The nearest airport is Bhuntar (Kullu) Airport (KUU IATA); Tel: +91 1902–265037, 265603), 50 km from Manali, 10 km from Kullu, about one hour away. Air-India has a morning flight from Delhi operated by Alliance Air.
Delhi is the nearest international airport, 560 km away from Manali. That airport is well connected to major cities in India as well as cities abroad.


== Get around ==

There are various ways of getting around in Manali, if you are not already travelling with your own vehicle. Most tourists  hire a taxi (various kinds available), which takes you around to all the sightseeing spots in and around  Manali (Rohtang, Manikaran, etc.) It costs about ₹1800 per day, or a little over ₹3000 if you book together for 3 days (in the peak season). Dress for Rohtang costs around ₹150 for each set including boots and the ski set will cost you around ₹200. These details are mentioned on a board at Mall Road. Be sure to bargain.
The second most common way is to hire a motorbike. There are many places where you can hire a motorbike (easy to find if you ask around) and is the most common mode of transport for foreigners. Cruiser bikes like Bullet, Royal Enfield Himalayan, and sport bikes from Honda, Bajaj, and Yamaha, are easily available, though Bullet is the most commonly seen one on the roads. Rates hover around ₹800-1500 per day in the peak season, but are much discounted at other times. A good place worth a look will be in Bike Rentals Manali office in Vashisht 9816044140, have a good selection of Royal Enfields and Pulsars. Also 'Tinku' Bike Mechanic near old Manali Bridge is an honest shop for bike rentals.
Public transport is not so good. There are cheap bus services, but they are not so frequent. Yet, if you are going to stay for a long time, it is better to know the times and use them, as other modes of public transport and exorbitant compared to the bus. For e.g., auto rickshaws take ₹200 from Manali Mall Road to Solang Valley, while the bus will cost you just ₹10. The buses are not punctual especially because they seem not have a written schedule. The best option is to ask about timing at the bus terminal. Buses start to run at 7-8 AM. Frequently a bus can be cancelled or late. You can get in and out almost at any place on the route; just wave at the driver.
Public bus routes

Kullu - Manali. Price ₹60. Every 15 min
Manali - Naggar. Every 1½ hr
Manali - Solang. Every hour


== See ==
There are several beautiful places that you can visit  around Manali. You can either use your own vehicle or hire local taxes. There are even buses are running frequently to these places except Rohtang Pass, Hadimba Temple etc. with very less cost. Below is list of places with detail expalnation.
1 Rohtang Pass. At an altitude of 3979 m (13,050 ft) above sea level, this is another adventure tourist site where it can be cold even on a summer day. It is the highest point on the Manali-Keylong road and provides a wide panoramic view of mountains rising far above clouds, which is truly breath-taking. Close by is a small lake called Dassaur Lake. Beas Kund, the source of river Beas, is also nearby. In winter, the road of Rothang Pass is closed.The road to Rohtang Pass is closed at Manali bridge on all Tuesdays between 9AM-6PM for carrying out road widening work & repairs. If you are able to leave early, before 09:00, you can avoid the traffic rush (found on all other days) and have Rohtang Pass to yourself (well almost!). Flip side is to be prepared for stoppages (extending up to a few hours) on the return trip as the road is blocked off where repair works are progressed.If you are driving up, be prepared for the rough broken roads at many places, sheer blind turns and tight hairpin bends, which can be exhilarating depending on the state of your nerves.If you are hiring a vehicle then better rent a four wheel drive vehicle from Manali. Some times the local people along with police does not allow the non-four wheel drive vehicles from going beyond Snow-Point (a place 16 km before Rohtang Pass) and force to hire their owned 4WD vehicles at exorbitant prices which can be up to ₹2000 per person. This happens in the winter times when there is heavy snow fall.The tours organized by HPTDC do not go up to Rohtang pass and terminate at Snow-Point. Shared taxis are also available. 

2 Beas Kund. An igloo-shaped temple, on top has a spring which is the origin of River Beas. 
 Fun park. Near the Hadimba Temple 
3 Gauri Shankar Temple.  

4 Hidimba Temple (Hidimba), Hadimba Temple Rd, Old Manali. It is an ancient cave temple dedicated to Hidimbi Devi, who was a character in the Indian epic, Mahābhārata. The temple is surrounded by a cedar forest at the foot of the Himālayas. The sanctuary is built over a huge rock jutting out of the ground, which was worshiped as an image of the deity. The structure was built in the year 1553. 
 Maa Sharvari Temple. This temple is represented as Kuldevi of the kings of Kullu in early times and is worshipped as a manifestation of Durga, and image of the goddess is also enshrined here. The divinity is popularly worshipped throughout the region during the festivals and the Goddess is transported to Kullu to visit the Lord Raghunathji during Dussehra festival. This temple is on the top of above the Shaminallah village, which is around 5 km from Manali, across the Beas river on the left bank on the way to Naggar Casttle. 
 Monasteries. Manali is known for its shiny gompas or Buddhist monasteries. These are maintained by donations from the local community and by the sale of hand-woven carpets in the temple workshops. 
 Museum of Himachal Culture & Folk Art. The museum is situated on a two minutes walk from the Hadimba Devi Temple in Utopia Complex. The museum is a unique and extraordinary collection of unknown and rare antiques of the state. It demonstrates the almost extinct articles that clearly display the forgotten culture, art and handicraft of Himachal Pradesh. The museum has 18 galleries in it which display antiques from different aspects of cultural life of people of Himachal Pradesh. 
5 Old Manali. 3 km northwest of Manali is Old Manali, famous for its orchards and old guesthouses. There is ruined fort here by the name of Manaligarh. There is also the Manu Maharishi Temple, dedicated to sage Manu. 
6 Rahala waterfalls. About 16 km from Manali at the start of the climb to the Rohtang Pass, are the beautiful Rahalla Falls at an altitude of 2,501 m. 
 Rozy Falls. On the way to Rohtang amazing water fall worth seeing. this water fall looks amazing between the high hills. 
7 Solang Valley. Popularly known as Snow Point, Solang Valley is 13 km northwest of Manali and famous for its 300-m ski lift. The Ski Lift ticket is ₹400 per head. It is a picturesque spot and offers splendid views of glaciers and the snow-capped mountains. Jagatsukh, the former capital of Manali, is also an important spot. 
8 Vashist Hot Water Springs and Temple. Around 3 km from Manali, across the Beas river is Vashist, a small village with natural sulphur springs. Modern bathhouses, with Turkish-style showers, have the hot water piped into them for the convenience of the visitors who come here to benefit from the medicinal properties. Vaishisht, also boasts a pair of old stone temples, opposite each other above the main square. Dedicated to the local patron saint Vashista, the smaller of the two opens on to a partially covered courtyard, and is adorned with elaborate woodcarvings. Those lining the interior of the shrine, blackened by years of oil-lamp and incense smoke, are particularly fine. The temple tanks are underground hot-water/sulfur springs. Be wary of hanging up your trousers or bags on the hooks provided, pickpocketing is a daily occurrence. Hand over your wallet to a trusted person for safekeeping before you enter the springs for a bath. 
There are some interesting temples of Tibetan Buddhist lineages located between old and new Manali.

 Beautiful Log Hut Area and Club house. Both these places especially log hut area have some good hotels to stay. 
 The Manali Gompa. Manali Gompa was built in 1960. It is one of the most important places for Buddhists. Buddhists come to this place from Ladakh, Tibet, Spiti, Lahul and Kinnaur. Manali Gompa is world famous for a large statue of Buddha and for its wall paintings. 
9 Naggar. The Castle, Roerich House and Art gallery are places to see. Moonlight dinner on the balcony of Hotel Castle restaurant is worth experiencing, with the lovely sight of twinkling lights below in the Beas valley. Bijli Mahadev temple, about 20 km from Naggar, is also worth visiting. 
10 Jana Falls (Jana Waterfall). 15 km from Naggar and 35 km from Manali, at Zana Village, beautiful Water Fall is worth visiting. The valley provides amazing views. There is one water fall on the road side and two other water falls which are not much explored by tourists and are amazing. Moreover traditional Himachali food is available here at small hut like shops. 
Kothi: 

Kothi is at the bottom of Rohatang Pass. It is a beautiful and photographic village where tourists can capture different thrilling views of the deep gorge through which the Beas swiftly runs. This is an amazing place to experience the natural beauty of high altitude mountain.

 Enfieldpoint, Old Manali, ☏ +91 96466 52350.  
 Nehru Kund. Nehru Kund is around 6 km from Manali. It is one of the natural springs of natural water in India. Nehru Kund is named after the late Prime Minister Jawar Lal Nehru. Nehru used to drink water from this Kund, while his journey to Manali. Nehru Kund is on the Manali-Keylong road, about 6 km from Manali. It is understood that a landslide has wiped out this spring. 


== Do ==
Get your photos clicked with either rabbits or yaks (near the Hidimba Temple). It will cost about ₹10-20 for a single photo.
One can also enjoy paddle boating in a fun park near Hidimba temple.
River rafting, skiing, zorbing, trekking, snow scootering, and river crossing. One of the best adventure companies is the High Himalayan Adventure, based in Vashisht village.

Paragliding- Paragliding is quite popular in Manali, especially in the peak season at Solang Valley. There are multiple levels, starting from the basic 1-minute flying for ₹450 (the most common), progressing to a more fun 5-minute flight for ₹1500. But the ultimate is the half an hour flight for ₹2500, for which they take you up almost halfway to Rohtang, and bring you back to Solang all the way by paragliding. In such a long flight, wind plays a big role, and sometimes it is not possible to fly all the way to Solang, something to keep in mind while going for it. Generally, later in the day you go for it, better are the chances you will do the whole flight. However, before you decide to paraglide in Manali, have a look at the "Stay safe" section of this article.
Rock climbing- there are some fabulous routes, however, go with a reputable company that can provide you suitable gear, otherwise this can become a dangerous sport. Look for the bright orange building across from Pizza Olive. The company also does abseiling trips, in which you can swing down into 9 tiers of a waterfall using rock-climbing equipment.
Bookworm in NAC Market behind the bus stand has books including travel literature, Indian Himalaya maps, postcards and coffee table books.
Early morning walks as Manali are best enjoyed before the town wakes up.
Go camping. Camping in this town is one of the most incredible experiences to have. You can camp at the alpine meadows, pine forests, by the lakes, or the base of snowy mountains. Beas River, Tirthan Valley, Solang Valley, Bhuntar, Sarai and Kothi village are some of the most scenic camping spots.
Trekking:

Deo Tibba Base Camp Trek: This trek is a technical trekking trail in Manali. This trek is a famous trek among the experience climbers.  This trek gives a magnificent view of Deo.
Friendship peak Trekking: This is one of the majestic mountains in the beautiful valley of Kullu. This mountain is situated at around 5289 m above the sea level. Best way to go for this trek is from Beas Kund and Dhundi.
Hampta Pass Trek: This trek is one of the most famous trekking trails in the Manali region. This trek is suitable for those who have some prior trekking experience and are reasonably fit. This trek passes through lush forests and eventually to scree and pebbles.
Himalayan Caravan Adventure: Offer you an array of adventures from off-beat safaris, less-known but more-interesting trekking paths, rock climbing, canyoning, white water rafting, paragliding, skiing & snowboarding etc. www.himalayancaravan.com
Brighu Trek : Brighu is very good place to trek. A lot of tourist heavily enjoy this trek. Mostly 2-3 day is enough for this trek. Local people often visit Brighu because it really memorable place.


== Buy ==
Keychains, name plates, etc. which are customized to ones own message are worth buying as mementos.
Also you can get your name carved on a single grain of rice.
One can also visit Manali Market to buy woolen stuff like sweaters, pull overs, shawls, and blankets. Hippie clothes and jewellery can be found in Old Manali.

Chingu. Local shops are aplenty selling chingus (a type of blanket) claiming to be warm in winters and cold in summers. Be wary of these. They will show you parcel ready chingus. Do not fall prey to them.
Fruit products, honey and apricot oil at Himcoop Juice Bar Manali are also something local produced in the valley. Jam from Himcoop taste like real fruit due to high contents of fruit pulp and apricot oil is good for joint pains and also general massage.
Do not buy saffron (kesar), musk (kasturi), or shilajit from street vendors; most of these products are fake. Buy from government-authorized shops only.


== Eat ==
 Apple Blossoms, Manali Heights Resort (near log huts area). Savour a Himachali menu as well as delectable Indian, European, oriental cuisines. 
 Blue Elephant Cafe. It is a small eatery with good Indian and Western spread close to the bridge on the Beas River. You get the option of sitting and enjoying the food right next to the river gushing by. Try out the freshly made parathas, bruschettas, omelettes and traditional Indian tea. 
 Bob Dylan's Cafe (Roasted and Toasted). Serves cookies, sandwiches, etc., with a complimentary movie theatre offering around 100 films alongside Bob Dylan's music. 
 Cafe Bella Vista, Hadimba Temple Rd (10 Minutes walk up from the mall road). A small Spanish-style café with 2 small & 2 cottage rooms available for stay. Serves fresh brick-oven pizzas & Italian. 
 Cafe m 1947, Old Manali, ☏ +91 9418461969. The 1st music cafe in Old Manali (near the bridge), on the banks of the River Manalsu. Cuisines from all around the globe and known for its dishes like the "Burger of Bodom", "UFO", and "The Terminator". Travelers can also play instruments in rhythm with the Voice of the River, and there are unplugged concerts and parties held now and then. 
 Cafe Zeppelinn, Kothi village (13km from Manali, on the way to Rohtang Pass). all day long. The last cafe once you leave Manali and are heading towards Rohtang Pass. It is run by young enterpreneurs for their love of life in the mountains and music. They serve good pizzas, pastas, sandwiches and momos. They also play excellent rock music from the 1960s and 1970s. Most paragliders will land at their cafe and many enjoy their services while waiting for their friends or families to pick them up. 
 Chawlas Square, Rangri NH21 (2 km from mall road, towards Kullu), ☏ +91 9816198928. Delicious north Indian and Mughlai food. 
 Chopsticks (opposite the bus stand). Really good Tibetan food. 
 Dawat Restaurant, Left Bank Aleo New Manali (left bank aleo), ☏ +91 9816100049. 24 hours. A well-decorated, in-house, multi-cuisine restaurant that offers Indian, Mughlai and Chinese delicacies. ₹1,500. 
 Drifters' Inn and Cafe (Situated in Old Manali). This has great food, Wi-Fi internet and friendly atmosphere. 
 Il Forno (ca. 100 m below the Hadimba Temple, in direction of New Manali), ☏ +91 98160 40144. Italian pizzas prepared by an Italian cook. Prices higher than Indian average but still cheap for Italian pizza. 
 Green Forest cafe (lying on the Hadimba-temple Old Manali Road, a few hundred meters from the temple). It is also a very popular destination for both locals and foreigners. It serves Tibetan soups, veggie dumplings and other sandwiches and snacks. 
 Johnson's Bar and cafe (5 minutes walk up from the mall road). It is a great place to hang out in the evening. 
 Lazy Dog, Old Manali. It has an extensive multi-cuisine menu. The food is quite good and the ambience is great. 
 Local Himachali Dish-Sidu (It is right at the tea shop behind bus stand in municipal market). One can eat sidu (which is like filled idli or filled rice baked bun) with chutney to experience a slice of Himachali cuisine with tea, black tea, or coffee. 
 Madras mess. It is a popular mess which serves south Indian meals and unlimited meals ₹80. 
 Manali market. Right from chat to Indian (veg/nonveg) to international cuisine like Italian/Chinese are available in the main market which is just opposite the Manali Bus stand. The mall road has a variety of eating options ranging from stalls and dhabas to fancy restaurants. Deeper into the lanes of the town, one can find more local eating places, catering to special tastes and habits ranging from Tibetan food, to Vaishnavi Dhabhas. You are sure to find something without hunting around too much. 
 Mayur Restaurant (in a lane opposite the upper end of the bus stand). 
 Moondance (right opposite the Dylan's cafe). Has a multi-cuisine menu, and the food and ambience are all good. 
 Old Manali. It is one of the best places to hang out in the evening. It has a great collection of restaurants/bars and shops. It is also not crowded like the Mall Road, with the crowd consisting mostly of foreigners. 
 Pizza Olive, Prini. Serves pizzas and Italian cuisine. 
 Satyam Restaurant, Mall Rd (Next to Shri Heera Medical Store), ☏ +91 98168 94518. On the mall road 200 m away from main Manali Bus stand with seating capacity of 75 persons at a time on 2 floors. Vegetarian with Jain options available. All types of Punjabi, Gujarati, South Indian and continental. 
 Shere Punjab. Serves good butter chicken with butter naan. You can also get a beer which is not mentioned in the menu, if you ask. 
 Shiva Paradise Cafe (Old Manali just on the bridge), ☏ +91 9805379377. Delicious non veg food specially kolapuri chicken and trout. 
 Vaishnao dhaba (in the market adjacent to the bus stand). 
 Valley View Restaurant, Snow Valley Resorts. Known for beautiful view and good homely buffet food. 
1 Smokehouse by BraaiCraft, Lily Brook Cottage (Shanag, Manali), ☏ +91 9740302277, connect@smokehousebybraaicraft.com. 11 AM - 08:30PM. Serves mutton and chicken roasts alongside live BBQ and grilled dishes in a gourmet outdoor setting. Diners enjoy scenic mountain views and a garden enhanced by a flowing brook. The restaurant is pet-friendly and offers parking facilities, and reservations are advised, particularly on weekends. ₹1200. (updated Feb 2025)


== Drink ==
The locals drink two kinds of alcoholic : Lugdi (plains) or Chang (Himalayan), a kind of crude beer made from fermented rice or barley and Sharab (plains) or Arak (Himalayan), an alcoholic drink distilled from Lugdi/chang. Arak can also be made from jaggery or apples or any other fruit.
It might be an interesting experience to visit a local home when the ladies make arak (quite regularly). You can sit in the fields where the ladies make it, have hot water from the distilling to wash with and "test" the product at frequent intervals.
Because there are apple orchards all around Manali, it's often possible to find apple cider. Besides this, there is alcohol available in bars, larger restaurants and the larger hotels.
Kullu-Manali Valley is known as fruit bowl of India.  Himcoop Juice Bar at The Mall Manali is one of the well known corner shop since 1972 selling 100% Natural Apple Juice and fruit drinks made from local fruits besides some syrups known as "Fruit Crush" to carry home to prepare fruit drinks after diluting with fresh water.  Himcoop Juice Bar is on the Main Mall as one of the corner shop next to Temple.


== Sleep ==


=== Budget ===
As of May 2023 it is still definitely possible to get a comfortable room with a great mountain view for around ₹800. Bargaining is a must if you're a foreigner and coming without an online booking, to avoid pushing the prices further up.


=== Home-stay ===
 Apple View Guest House, ☏ +91 1902 253899. Check-out: noon. Very friendly, food menu provided for additional nominal fees. Hot water is free. ₹300-400. 
Footloose Camps, +91 8800763430. Hamta Valley, 9 km from the Mall Road. Backpacker hostel and campsite costing ₹500-900 per bed.
Blue Guest House, Castle Road Naggar, Brahman Kothi, Naggar, Kullu Manali, +91 9817287347, +91 9816421109 (Mrs. Lata Sharma), +91 9816377076 (Mr Chander Shekhar Sharma), hot water, CTV, view of Kullu Valley and Beas River and roof-top restaurant. This is a family-run guest house and the couple is very courteous. The guest house costs ₹200-500 per night and is on the way up, about 0.5 km before the Castle. Manali is 30 min by local bus.
 Drifters' Inn & Cafe, Manu Temple Road, Old Manali (www.driftersinn.in) (about 300 m before Manu Temple), ☏ +91 9805033127. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. 3 km from the main town of Manali. Drifters is really high on value for money. Rooms and toilets are clean and cozy. 
 Flamingo Resort, Kanyal Road, Simsa (about 2 km from Mall Road), ☏ +91 9816051236, booking.manalihotels@gmail.com. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. Room + breakfast + dinner @ ₹2300 per night for 2 persons. ₹2300. 
 Hotel Shandela, Club House Rd (Near electricity office, The Mall), ☏ +91 9418388208, hotelshandela@in.com. Rooms overlooking the forest on one side. A favourite with World Challenge expeditioners. 
 Kapoor Resort, Hadimba Temple Rd (about 0.5 km from Mall Road), ☏ +91 9736386854. Check-in: noon, check-out: noon. Room + breakfast + dinner @ ₹1200 per night for 2 persons. 
 Rocky's Guest House and Cafe (approx. 300 m uphill from Manu Temple in Old Manali), ☏ +91 78319 58071, +91 98164 91374, booking@rockysguesthome.in. Check-in: noon, check-out: 11AM. Run by a local family, with spacious rooms, mountain views and an outdoor cafe that serves food of Himachal Pradesh as well as a wide range of Indian, Tibetan, Italian, Thai, and Israeli cuisine. ₹600-1,200 per night. (updated Apr 2018)
 Tiger's Eye, Club House Rd (Above Drifter's and towards the right in the village). Clean and warm rooms. Nice wooden floors. Comfortable bed. Hot water. Pretty courtyard. ₹400. 
 Himanshu Resort, Siyal Rd, Model Town (about a 2-minute walk from Mall Road), ☏ +91 9736000016, himanshuresortsmanali@gmail.com. Check-in: 10AM, check-out: noon.  (updated Oct 2018)
 Nature Treat Hut, Jagat Sukh (6 km south of Manali), ☏ +91 9816056934, magicmountain41@hotmail.com. In a small village with traditional wooden houses. It is surrounded by an apple orchard and wide view of the Himalayan mountain range. It is far from the crowds. 
 Ramgarh Heritage Villa (in the small town of Raison, midway between Kullu & Manali), ☏ +91 9816248514, nakulkhullar5@gmail.com. A heritage bungalow built in 1928, during the British era, with high ceilings, spacious bedrooms and fireplaces, and surrounded by apple orchards & kiwi plantations. It is managed by the descendants of the same family that built it. Behind the home-stay is the village of Benchi, whose residents work on the orchards. The village offers a glimpse of the Himachali countryside with its by-lanes overlooking the Beas and the Dhalaudhar range. (updated Jun 2017)


=== Mid-range ===
 Himachal Cottage Villa (Village Bashkola, Kullu-Manali), ☏ +91 9417150502, himachalcottagevilla@gmail.com. Set of three cottages near orchards. 
 Himkund Cottages, Rangri, ☏ +91 9817094200. A collection of three cottages with 2-3 rooms in each cottage, which are well decorated. (updated Dec 2015)
1 Honeymoon Inn Manali, Left Bank, Aleo Manali (1.5 km from the main bus stand on the left bank of the river on the road going towards Nagar), ☏ +91 11-43101103, info@honeymooninnmanali.com. 59-room hotel with extensive lawns and indoor facilities. 
 Manali Camp, Kullu Manali Naggar Road Sarsai (Haripur), ☏ +91 9816828821, toll-free:  +91 9318621000, manalicamp21@gmail.com. Check-in: 11AM, check-out: noon. Provides accommodation with adventure activities facilities and free WiFi in camp area. There is a park on site and guests can enjoy the on-site restaurant. A vegetarian/non veg food is served at the property. The tented camp offers a barbecue. Guests can rent a car or use the business centre. The camp can also arrange a bicycle rental service. ₹2250. (updated Jan 2019)
 Manali Heights (Log Hut Area), ☏ +91 9316101103, manali_hts@satyam.net.in. Resort set amidst ancient deodars. 
 Shingar Regency, ☏ +91 9816921378. 44 rooms, in natural surroundings around Hadimba Temple. 
 Silmog Garden (Near Mall Road), ☏ +91 1902 252862, +91 94182-05147, silmoggarden@gmail.com. Touts its "homely food and comfort". Hotel has facilities like Wifi, backup power, restaurants, television, credit card acceptance, 24 hours hot water with solar-heated backup heater, parking. 
 Le Grand Manali, National Highway 03, The Mall Road, Rangri (on the back of river Beas), ☏ +91 9736 797918, +91 98100-02393, pradeep@legrandmanali.com. 3-star hotel with 75 rooms. The hotel uses imported wooden flooring and has balconies that face the valley and snow-clad mountains. The rooms are furnished with 32" LEDs with satellite TV and refrigerators. The hotel also has a discotheque with a bar, and a multi-cuisine restaurant called Silhouette. (updated May 2019)
 Snow Valley Resorts, ☏ +91 1902 253 228, +91 1902 253-027, +91 98160-03027, info@snowvalleyresorts.com. This is a handsome place sprawled over the Log Hut Area and is surrounded by apple orchards and deodhar forest. All rooms have facilities like 32" LCD TV, mini fridge, tea/coffee maker, wooden flooring. 
2 SunPark Resorts, Left Bank Aleo New Manali, ☏ +91 1902253037. Check-out: noon. 3-star property with facilities such as a discotheque, coffee shop. 2000. 
 Johnson Lodge, ☏ +91 1902-251523. Tastefully done up property with a popular bar and restaurant. Rooms @ ₹4000. 
 Tree House Cottages, Village Jong, Katrain, ☏ +91-70182-28952, +91-98160-78765, treehousecottages@gmail.com. Check-in: 11AM, check-out: noon.  (updated Dec 2015)
 White Mushroom Manali. A stone and wooden property facing the Himalayas. It has 7 bedrooms with attached bathrooms, TV, tea/coffee maker, and additional amenities. Each room has a great panoramic view of the mountainous landscape from the balcony. (updated Jun 2018)
 The Hotel Moon, Kanyal Road, ☏ +91 9289327110. Check-in: noon, check-out: 11AM. A stone and wooden property facing the Himalayas. It has 12 bedrooms with attached bathrooms, TV, tea/coffee maker, water bottles and additional amenities. Each room has a great panoramic view of the mountainous landscape from the balcony. ₹900 per night. (updated Sep 2025)


=== Splurge ===
3 The Himalayan - Castle resort, Hadimba Road, ☏ +91 1902-250777, +91 1902 250999, +91 8894005999, info@thehimalayan.com. Check-in: 2PM, check-out: Noon. 8 guest rooms with four-poster beds, antique armoires and working fireplaces and 8 cottages each with 2 bedrooms complete with en-suite bathrooms, dining space and working fireplace. All cottages have their own private gardens, balconies and mountain views, croquet and trampoline provided. Refectory restaurant serves continental and Indian cuisine. On the premises is the Olde Raven Pub/Bar and a swimming pool (seasonal) open to non-resident guests at a charge. Boardroom/conference room for offsites/meetings. (updated Oct 2024)
 Manu Allaya.  
 Mapple The River Crescent Resort, ☏ +91 9816921378, reservations@mapplehotels.com. 4-star resort at Rangree on banks of the River Beas. 50 AC rooms, centrally heated. 
4 Royal Inn Manali, Kanyal Rd, Simsa Village, ☏ +91 9988007573, contact@royalinnmanali.com. Check-in: noon, check-out: 10AM. Has family and couple suite rooms, and an onsite restaurant with beautiful views. (updated May 2023)
 Span Resort and Spa, Kullu Manali Highway, Katrain, ☏ +91 11 4143 7900.  
 Shirar Resort and Spa, National Highway 3 (near Beas River), ☏ +91 9459301111, +91 7831831111, +91 8894111111. Riverside resort. (updated Jun 2026)


== Stay safe ==
Manali is a safe city but during seasonal time a surge of visitors keep visiting this beautiful place and some transients exploit this opportunity for their own benefits. Best be exercise caution if in a crowd.
If you get lost and don't have enough directions get around the city then just ask for Mall Road (Manali town centre). From there you can easily head to any destination of your choice.
Don't exchange currency in illegal market. Always ask for receipt after doing currency trade with exchange dealer. There is a Western Union office on the Mall Road.
A word of caution about paragliding in Manali. Many pilots of these parachutes are un-trained and obtain licences in the usual way any licence is obtained in India. Many a tourist visits the Lady Willingdon Mission Hospital with broken bones, sometimes protruding out, after accidents. Some para-gliders crash into innocent bystanders who end up with spinal injuries and paralysis. Serious, complicated cases with multiple organ injuries and heavy blood loss are stabilized to the extent possible and referred to either Chandigarh or Shimla. Sadly, some don't make it. Blood availability is very very limited in this hilly area. So think very carefully before deciding to paraglide in Manali.
Women should avoid going into small lanes and by-lanes after it is dark and make sure that you are not wearing any jewellery while walking on the streets. There were two reported rapes of tourists in 2018 alone.


== Go next ==
Travelling northward from Manali is the breathtaking region of Lahaul and Spiti across the Rohtang Pass. The highway crosses the pass and forks at Gramphoo (12 km) the left one goes to Lahaul and is the Manali Leh highway and the road on the right leads to Spiti via Kunzum La. The Rohtang pass also marks the boundary between the fertile Kullu valley with its lush greenery and the sparse vegetation Lahaul and Spiti. The Ladakh, Zanskar and Changthang areas further on are even more barren.

Beas Kund - It is named after the sage (Rishi) named Beas and this tiny lake is situated at upper Solan valley, which is a heart of summer and winter games in Manali.
Deo Tibba - It is one of the peaks set back in valley of Manali. It is famous among trekkers who have substantial mountaineering knowledge.
Friendship Peak - Friendship peak is located in Beas Kund region of Manali, facing other different kinds of peaks such as Shiti Dhar, Hanuman Tibba and Seven Sisters. It is the only peak in Himachal where no royalty needs to be paid to IMF.
Hamta Pass - At a height of 4,268 m, Hamta Pass is made of various snow bridges which pass over Hamta Stream. It is highly renowned trekking base and as a part of trek, visitors can also explore Bara Shirgi Glacier.
Purola - It lies in the state of Uttrakhand and leads to almost identical geographical location of Yamunotri. There are ample transportation facility available to reach Purola.
Indrasan Peak - After crossing Hamta Pass one will find Indrasan Peak (Throne of Indra)