Ooty, short for Ootacamund and officially Udhagamandalam (Tamil: உதகமண்டலம் Udagamaṇḍalam), is a popular hill resort in the state of Tamil Nadu in Southern India. The name Udhagamandalam is derived from the Toda word "othakal-mund" which means "house in mountains". Ooty stands at 2,240 m (7,347 feet) above sea level in the Nilgiri Mountains. Here you can escape the heat of the region around: The weather is quite pleasant at a mean of 20-25°C during the day around the year. Ooty is one of the first places in India to get rid of plastic carry bags, so if you are heading there, remember to carry your own reusable bags, not plastic.


== Understand ==

Ooty is home to 5 tribal communities; Todas, Kurumbas, Paniyas, Irulas and Kotas. It was turned into a hill station in the 19th century by the British, and served as the summer headquarters of the Madras Presidency. In the Nilgiris (Blue Mountains), it draws swarms of tourists every year. The landscape is marked by rolling hills covered with dense vegetation, smaller hills and plateaus covered with tea gardens, and eucalyptus trees. Many portions of the hills are preserved as natural reserve forests, and special permits will be needed to camp in noncamp sites. Ooty is not the destination in itself, as much as it is the focal point of attraction. Auto touring the surrounding country side is certainly a must do. Unfortunately, the hill town suffers from overcrowding and erosion of natural resources. Tourism has placed an enormous strain on the natural resources resulting in pollution, water shortage and roads.
The hilly region also houses smaller towns like Coonoor and Kotagiri. These smaller towns are a better choice to visit and spend time in, since they are off the beaten path, yet less than an hour away from Ooty. They enjoy the same natural climes and prices are a lot cheaper.


== Get in ==


=== By plane ===
Ooty has no airport. The nearby airports are located in:

 Coimbatore (CJB IATA). Nearest airport (88km and 3.5 hrs) (updated Apr 2025)
 Mysore (MYQ IATA). Mysore airport is also close (116 km and 4 hrs) (updated Apr 2025)
 Kozhikode (CCJ IATA). Serves the most destinations out of these three airports (140 km and 4 hrs) (updated Apr 2026)


=== By train ===
1 Udagamandalam  SR  (UAM). The Nilgiri Mountain Railway (NMR) connects Ooty with Mettupalayam. It is a meter-gauge railway, popularly known as the toy train. In 2005 it was declared a UNESCO Heritage Site under Mountain Railways of India. It follows the rack and pinion technology, where a third rail reduces the speed of the train. Today, both steam and diesel engines operate on the route. The route is 51 km long and takes a long time. For tourist with limited time can opt for a journey from Coonoor. 


=== By bus ===
2 Ooty bus stand. Ooty is well connected by bus. Direct buses from Coimbatore take 4 hours and are operated by KSRTC (Kerala) and by private bus companies. The private bus operators should depart from Mettupalayam Bus Stand in Coimbatore, but check it beforehand. The schedules of the private operators are integrated in Redbus. From Kozhikode, TNSTC has direct buses. From Mysore there are direct buses operated by KSRTC (Karnataka) and by private operators which are also integrated in Redbus. (updated Feb 2026)


=== By car ===
The Nilgiris are in Tamil Nadu, but near the borders Karnataka and Kerala. The hills consequently can be reached from within Tamil Nadu by travelling up a heavily forested winding road, with many hair-pin bends. The road trip from any state is scenic, although the Coimbatore-Mettupalayam-Coonoor-Ooty road (i.e. the Tamil Nadu route) is the most travelled and best-maintained. All roads to the Nilgiri hills have nominal tolls.
Taxis at the Coimbatore "new bus stand" charge ₹2500 (negotiable) when reserved and ₹600 each when shared, four people share an Omni (Maruti van). In case a hotel has been per-booked, they often provide taxis to and from Coimbatore for ₹2000.
Ooty is 284 km from Bangalore by road. The journey takes about eight hours, depending on the road's condition. There is a shorter route with a diversion at Mudumalai wildlife sanctuary, which passes the towns of Masinagudi and Kalhatti. This route curtails the distance to Ooty by about 50 km. This road is closed at night as it passes through the jungle, requiring a few hours spent at the check post which is closed at night. This road as it is narrow and steep. There are eateries and a fuel station in the town of Masinagudi. Resorts near Masinagudi town let cottages. These offer relaxing weekend getaways. There are restaurants between Bangalore and Mysore, and within Mysore, but from Mysore to Ooty there are few restaurants, so it is advisable to stock up on groceries in advance. Start early for a more leisurely drive through Bandipur and Mudumalai forest, taking in occasional animal sightings.


== Get around ==

Taxis, tourist cabs, auto rickshaws are available in plenty. There are no standard rates except for tourist cabs. Rickshaws charge a minimum of ₹30. Town buses are available to all important places. Conducted sight seeing tours are arranged by private operators and the Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation (TTDC). There are around 3-4 different day trip routes/packages available. Bus day-trip cost ₹125-150 and taxi day-trip cost ₹900-1100. Even if you arranged the taxi through the hotel (even TTDC), verify with the hotel and operator before the trip that there are no hidden costs. Taxi drivers will often demand high parking fees and lunch, which is already paid for. It is not uncommon for bus/taxi drivers to get commission from remote restaurants and shops. These places are overpriced, try avoiding such restaurants.
Bus and taxi will take tourists to remote, high-priced restaurants for lunch. Try not to eat in such places because the food is cold, the place is not clean beyond the façade, and it is always overpriced (you will end up paying for taxi driver's lunch, too).
Also avoid driver's recommendation for sleeping arrangements. They (few of them) will take you to the hotels for accommodation where they get 20% commission, which will be added in your room tariff without your knowledge.


== See ==

 Annamalai Temple (about 20 km from Ooty). This place has grown as a famous temple of Lord Muruga, and is known as 7th Hill house of the lord. The view from the temple is great. There is an observatory at the top of hill for the public to enjoy the magnificent panoramic view. (updated Oct 2015)
1 Doddabetta Peak. (Timings: 8am - 5pm). The peak of Dodabetta (literally meaning the big mountain) stands at an altitude of 2,623 m. It is the highest peak in Nilgiri and the second highest peak of South India. About 8 km from Ooty the peak provides panoramic view of the surrounding area. On a clear day the views can extend to the plains of Coimbatore and the flat highlands of Mysore. There are boards highlighting the area viewed. The peak houses a tower-like structure known as the telescope house. This elevated circular structure provides a great view of the surroundings. The place houses several eateries and makeshift shops. The area is a wildlife zone and the peak can only be reached by car and auto, as trekking is prohibited. Tickets: ₹6 (children below 5 years are free). Still camera: ₹10; Video camera: ₹50. 
 Echo Rock. Some call it the "Lamb's Rock", as it naturally took the shape of a lamb. Go through a very small forest and then you can see the rock. 
2 Fern Hills Palace. Be sure to visit this palace-turned-hotel of the Mysore Maharaja. Extremely beautiful place and quite affordable tea-snacks and slightly expensive buffet dinner. The palace and its estate are beautiful and are open to guests. The locals often will call it Mysore Palace to avoid confusion with the Fern Hill Hotel. 
 Hidden Valley.  
3 Ooty Botanical Gardens. (Timing: 7:00 am - 6:30 pm all days). If you are on a sightseeing tour to Ooty, you might want to visit the Government Botanical gardens, which were laid out in 1847. The picturesque gardens that are maintained by the Horticulture department of the state, cover an area of about 22 ha. The gardens have well over 650 species of plants and trees, including a fossil of a tree, which is believed to be more than 20 million years old. The garden is very popular with nature lovers and those who long to walk among greenery and see rare ferns and shrubs up close. If you are in Ooty in the month of May, then you can also be a part of the summer festival, which is held here annually. The festival holds flower shows and various cultural programs showcasing the talent of the locals and the renowned artists. Tickets: Adult: ₹100, Children (5 - 10 yrs): ₹50, Still camera: ₹50, Video camera: ₹100. 
4 Toda Temple (Approachable through Botanical Garden). Todas were the original inhabitants of Ooty region. They are one of the tribes of the Nilgiri region. The Toda temple consists of an inverted U-shaped structure made of Bamboo. The temple strands at the centre of a circular enclosure, located below ground level. A small, low gateway leads to the interiors of the temple. One has to crawl through the gateway to access the interiors of the temple. However, outsiders are not allowed inside the temple. The entrance is marked with several motifs representing the sun, moon, stars and buffaloes. Buffaloes are an integral part of Toda culture. A group of buffaloes can be seen roaming near the temple complex. The Toda dress consists of a shawl with bright red and black stripes. Several festivities are held at the Toda temple complex. Ask the locals for the festivity details. (updated Apr 2025)
5 Ooty Rose gardens. (Timing: 7:00 am - 6:30 pm all days). It is an amazing and very large area garden. There are 27,000 rose plant of 400 varieties. It is the largest collection of roses in India. It is a beautifully landscaped garden spread across several terraces. A paved pathways meanders through the garden. Decorative fountains are also part of the garden. The garden offers a great view of the town of Ooty. A shop sells rose seeds. The roses blooms from late April to early June, so going there off-season is not very interesting. Tickets: Adult: ₹75, Children: ₹40, Still camera: ₹50 and Video camera: ₹100. 
 Pine forest. It's a natural beauty. After the end of the forest a lake is there. Be careful while walking as the path has slope. Down the slope lies the waters of Kamaraj-sagar Dam. 
 Shooting Point. One very nice place is that. Don't miss it. The view is very pleasant. 
 The Tea Factory. Several tree gardens and factories are there. On the way you will get lots of them. They will approach you with free tea taste and offer some tea packets to buy. But be cautious if you don't have much knowledge about tea, better not to buy from them as the packet tea has not the same taste as they gave you to taste. The spices' quality is not so good. 
6 Wax World (Wax Museum). It is a private investment not supported by the government. Don't expect much like other foreign wax museums which are helped by tourism authorities for advertisements and promotions. But for sight seeing its good. More attractive is the very old house, where the museum is set up. Candles are available. But it is suffering from a lack of funds for expansion so they request tourists to visit and to get financial help from them, which is the only form of support. 
7 Adam's Fountain (Charring cross). Built in 1886 in honour of the Governor of Ooty. The cost of the construction was raised through public funding. Today the ornate fountain is an important landmark of the hill station. (updated Aug 2022)
8 Government Museum (Stone House or Connemara Cottage or Kal Bungalow) (Ooty-Mysore Road). (Timings: 10:30 am - 6:30 pm. Closed on Friday, second Saturday and national holidays). The museum is housed in the bungalow of John Sullivan, the then collector of Coimbatore. Built in 1823 it happens to be the first stone house of Ooty. The museum came up in 1989 to conserve and promote the cultural legacy of the Nilgiri district. The museum houses several galleries consisting of the flora & fauna and the tribals of Nilgiri. There are galleries covering diverse topics like archaeology and numismatics. Tickets: Adult: ₹10, Children: ₹5, Foriegner: ₹100, Foreign children: ₹75, still camera: ₹100 and video camera: ₹200. (updated Aug 2022)


=== Churches of Ooty ===
9 St. Stephen's Church. Located atop a hilltop the St. Stephen's Church is the oldest Church in Ooty and one of the oldest churches of Nilgiri District. The foundation stone of the church was laid in 23 April 1829, to coincide with the birthday of King George IV. It was opened on Easter Sunday, 3 April 1831. The church is complete with a clock tower and the entrance is through a porch on the southern side. The interiors are spectacular with stained glass on the alter and the side walls. The walls also houses several memorial plaques. The church compound houses a graveyard behind the church. It is an active graveyard but there are several old graves. The entrance to the church compound is through a twin metal arched gateways from the south. Three pillars support the two decorative metal arches. At the foot of the central pillar stands the zero stone and mile stone of Ooty. It is from this very point the distance of Ooty are measured. (updated Aug 2022)
10 Holy Trinity Church (Opposite St. Stephen's Church). Initially it served as a school on weekdays and church on Sundayas for the local Christians. In 1858 it started functioning as a full fledged Church. The present structure has gone through several renovation. The interior is free of ornamentaion. (updated Aug 2022)
11 Sacred Heart Cathedral. The twin-towered massive cathedral dominates the skyline of Ooty. The Church dates back to 1897. Since, 1955 the church is serving a Cathedral for the Catholics of Ooty. In 1987 during repairs, a large section of the church roof collapsed. This led to major renovation. The new church was opened to the public on 7 July 1989. Today a long flight of stairs lead to the cathedral. The interiors are beautifully laid with large glass painted windows. There are several statues, including the 14 stations of the cross. (updated Aug 2022)


== Do ==
Most travel agents and hotels conduct guided tour packages that will bundle you into a bus, and tick off the most important and hence crowded "tourist" spots in the area. Some hotels also arrange for private cars like Indica, TATA Sumo.

1 Boat House. Paddle and speed boat rides in the lake. There are various rides like pirate ship, flying saucer, toy train, etc. There are other activities like haunted houses. Number of eateries serving a wide range of food. A place to hang out with family and kids. Tickets: ₹20 entry free. Rides and other activities have different tickets. (updated Apr 2025)
Travel on the railway. The charming Nilgiri Mountain Railway (NMR), blue and cream with wooden coaches and large windows, is widely regarded as a marvel of engineering.
Go for long walks and hikes.
Visit a tea plantation and if possible a tea factory.
Travel the countryside in a 4x4.
Catch a round of golf at the Gymkhana Golf course (membership or introduction required)
Visit the local Army cantonment - the Madras Regimental Center and the DSSC (Defense Services Staff College).
Visit terrace farmed cabbage fields around Ooty.
Visit the Mudumalai forest sanctuary (1-2 days minimum).
Visit the Needle industries which is around 6km from maintown Ooty in Ketti.
Visit 9th mile and also the 6th mile where lot of movies are shot.
Visit the Municipal Market and shop for fresh local fruits.
 Horse back riding. It's popular here. In one hour you can go around the lake or longer rides you can visit countryside around Ooty. Some knowledge of horses would be good as the guides are local men who don't speak too much English, teaching is minimal. On top of the price you have to pay for guide. US$4/hour. 
Explore the nearby Avalanche and Emerald Lakes, for day picnics, treks, and walkthroughs of the surrounding villages. You can also hike through the nearby tribal hamlet of Mullimunth of the Toda people. The 3 km trek takes 5 hours and passes through wooded areas and streams along the settlements.


== Buy ==
Ooty and Nilgiris are well known for a variety of local products like tea, eucalyptus oil, chocolates, spices and gourmet cheese. There are a lot of shops that deal these products, though you have to be careful that you get an authentic product.

 Green Shop. It is an extension of the Keystone Foundation that has been working in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve over the last 15 years (since 1995) with indigenous communities on eco-development initiatives. and makes available their handicrafts and products like bee honey, bee wax and other hand-crafted artifacts. They also stock excellent gourmet cheeses like Gouda, Colby, Monterey Jack, Cheddar, Haloumi and Herb Cream Cheeses made by Acres Wild Cheesemaking Farmstay in Coonoor. They also have a bee museum that is certainly worth a visit as they show documentaries on wild bees and honey collection. 
 Taj Bakers, Main Bazaar, Ooty. Visit Taj Bakers for traditional Ooty Biscuit called (Varkey) and other bakery items like home made chocolates, and cakes.. 
 King's Star. Ooty is famous for its chocolates, and the best place to have them is at King's Star. They have around 4 outlets in Ooty and are the first chocolate makers in Ooty. (The shops are run by the 3rd generation of the family. 


== Eat ==

There are various restaurants in Ooty, mostly offering South Indian food, but some offer North Indian food.

1 Hotel Sri Velmurugan, Walsham Road, Green fields (On the road connecting Alankar Theatre (in Ettines road) and the Commercial Road), ☏ +91 9944817139, +91 423-2444968, hotelsrivelmurugan@gmail.com. 6AM to 11PM. Traditional South Indian restaurant. (updated Jun 2019)
 Earl's Secret, Kings Cliff.  
 Bismillah Hotel, Near Juma Masjidh, Upper Bazar. Delicious meat and fish dishes of Calicut taste. (updated Mar 2017)
 Navodaya Chaater Cafe (C-Store), Willow bund road, ☏ +91 9840249656. 3pm onwards. Serves vegetarian delicacies, including maggi. (updated Nov 2019)


== Drink ==
The Nilgiris are famous for tea.

 Hotel Blue hills, Commercial Road. Best non-veg hotel in Ooty. Serving biriyani and other dishes for more than a decade. 
 Krishan Prabhas. lower bazaar, near bus stand, ooty 


== Sleep ==
There is no dearth of accommodations, with many hotels and inns that cater to every budget. Accommodations are no more expensive than most cities in India, and the popular Indian hotel chains have a presence here.

 Hotel Darshan, ☏ +91 423 2452288, +91 423 2443378, +91 423 2443807, hoteldarshan@yahoo.co.in. 34 rooms facing the lake, restaurant, room service, 24 hrs hot & cold water, in-house laundry, carpeted rooms, cable TV, parking, camp fire, doctor on call, travel desk, group accommodation available for small and large groups. ₹900 and up. 
 Hotel Maneck, Main Bazaar, ☏ +91 423 2443494. Very central hotel near horse race track with good economical restaurant on basement. Hotel and restaurant are under Jain management. The rooms start from ₹1200 
 Hotel Sinclair, Gorishola Rd, ☏ +91 423-2444309, fax: +91 423-2444229, ooty@sinclairshotels.com. Great view of Ooty and surrounding hills. 5 minutes drive to go to the town market and restaurants. The hotel has its own restaurant and a bar. ₹2,000-10,000. 
 Railway Retirement Room (inside the railway station).  ₹150. (updated May 2015)
 Reflections Guest House. A short walk along the main road - turn right coming out of the train station, or left coming out of the bus stop (which is opposite the train station). It is tidy and with good views of the lake and hills. ₹550/night for upstairs room (Sep 2010). Location is very good - short walk to train station and bus stop, short walk to boat house, Thread Gardens and other tourist attractions. The food in the restaurant is good value for its price and nicely cooked. The owners are helpful and professional, and the common spaces make it a very friendly place to stay. 
 Sunshine Inn, ☏ +91 99433-33323, +91 98942-96961. Three-star property with 70 rooms. Includes a restaurant, room service, in-house laundry, and travel desk, and car parking is available inside the hotel premises. Season tariff starts from ₹1800 + tax. 
 Sherlock Hotel. A colonial villa several kilometers away from the town with breathtaking views of the surrounding hills and warm and friendly service. Rooms have cozy fireplaces. The restaurant alone is worth a visit serving outstanding continental food and also murgh boti masala and mint paranthas. Several short walking trails start nearby. A trip to Ooty is worth it just for a stay at this hotel. ₹1875-3000 depending on size and view. 
 Sullivan court, Near Rose Garden. 5-star luxury hotel. Most famous hotel, best rooms, part of ITC Hotels India. 
 Ajantha Lodge, Lower Bazar, Juma Masjidh Street, (near Railway Station), ☏ +91 9159323199. Mr. Sadiq Basha runs this lodge in a cute period building of 1912. 400. (updated Mar 2017)
1 Treebo Whispering Meadows, 264, Off Gymkhana Golf link road, Fingerpost, ☏ +91 9322 800 100, hello@treebohotels.com. Check-in: noon, check-out: 11AM. Treebo Whispering Meadows, a heritage property off Gymkhana Golf Link Road. Starting from 1999. (updated Oct 2017)
 Funstay, ☏ +91 99028 60849. Cottages, Resorts and Tents, attached washrooms, party space, Room services, Food service, car parking, In house laundry and Hot running water. These homestays in Ooty are just 3 to 4 km away from Ooty bus stop and railway station. Starts from 1550 to 6500 per person per night. 
2 West Downs Resort, 100, Westbury Rd, ☏ +91 423-2442262, +91 8098103386, +91 8098103388, info@westdownsresort.com. Resort from the British colonial period (updated Jun 2024)
Petals Luxury Homestay No.7/432, Deavrshola, Balacola (PO),Kundah Taluk,The Nilgiris - 643 203. Phone:(+91) 8300038760, petalsnilgiris@gmail.com
 Green Apple Residency, Main Bazaar Near Bus Station, ☏ +91 94436 04337.  ₹ 2,000. (updated Mar 2026)


== Cope ==
Temperatures drop to 10–15°C at night and in the morning, so make sure to bring appropriate clothing.


== Go next ==
Bandipur National Park
Nagarhole National Park
Kodanad Viewpoint in Kotagiri
Mudumalai Wildlife Sanctuary